# "Inasmuch..." ~ The One Hundred-Year History Of The San Francisco Ladies' Protection And Relief Society ~ 1853-1953

## Front Matter

By Rowena Beans

Edited by Carol Green Wilson

San Francisco, California, 1953

Copyright 1953 by the San Francisco Ladies' Protection And Relief Society

Printing By James J. Gillick & Co. Berkeley, California

_To all the gallant women who have so faithfully carried on this valuable work for women and children._

## San Francisco Ladies' Protection And Relief Society ~ Office Holders

### Presidents

Mrs. Nathaniel Gray 		1854-1887
Mrs. George Barstow 		1888-1903
Mrs. S. W. Dennis 			1903-1910
Miss Anna Wheaton Beaver	1911-1937
Mrs. James Henry Deering	1937-1941
Mrs. Donald Craig 			1941-1943
Mrs. Edwin Vernon Krick		1943-1952
Mrs. Warren C. Perry 		1952-


### Board Of Managers

Mrs. Warren C. Perry
President

Mrs. John J. Miller Jr.
1st Vice-President

Miss Elizabeth J. Rolph
2nd Vice-President

Mrs. Ellen Hindes Krusi
3rd Vice-President

Mrs. James W. Towne
4th Vice-President

Miss Margaret Zane
Treasurer

Mrs. Philip F. Landis
Recording Secretary

Mrs. Donald Craig
Corresponding Secretary

Mrs. James H. Allen
Miss Edith W. Allyne
Mrs. George L. Beaver
Mrs. William K. Bowes
Mrs.Leo D. Bryne
Mrs. William Hilbert
Mrs. Edwin V. Krick
Mrs. Ralph Lyon
Mrs.William Nigh, Jr.
Mrs. Philip H. Pierson
Mrs. Charles E. Smith
Mrs. Reginald Knight Smith
Mrs. Stuart F. Smith
Mrs.John T. Stephenson
Miss Lottie Woods
Honorary Member
Mrs. Carroll C. Cambron

### Board Of Directors

* Bradley B. Brown
* Bruce Cornwall
* John E. Cushing
* Barrett G. Hindes
* James S. Hutchinson
* Ferard Leicester
* Norman B. Livermore
* Joseph A. Moore Jr
* David L. White

## Contents

Foreword vii

Acknowledgments viii

Introduction ix-x

Chapter One 1-12
"For Ladies In Need..."	1853-1863
Chapter Two
"A Permanently Established Charity" 1864-1874
Chapter Three
"Distribute Your Gold.." 1875-1889
Chapter Four
"Hold Fast That Which Is Good..." 1890-1899
Chapter Five
"To Do The Right...And To Trusten..." 1900-1905 .
Chapter Six
"It Was Time To Get..." 1906-1907
Chapter Seven
"Overflowing With Kindliness..." 1908-1920
Chapter Eight
"Another Phase Of Work..." 1921-1953

## APPENDIX

### Certificate of Incorporation

### House Rules and Regulations

### The Death of Samuel C. Harding

## Foreword

One hundred years ago in the exciting new city of San Francisco wise church women sensed a pressing need and met it. In 1953 the Board of Managers of the century-old San Francisco Ladies' Protection and Relief Society honor the foresight of these founders with this brief sketch of accomplishment.

The painstaking research for this undertaking was carried out with loyal devotion by the late Rowena Beans, a member of that Board for eighteen years. It has been my Privilege to edit her manuscript into its present form for readers with streamlined time budgets. At the same time we have preserved, through quotations from the old minute books, some personal narratives of the women who wove Practical neighborliness into the glittering fabric of our city's history.

My own effort has been dedicated to the memory of my husband's grandmother, Catherine Kellogg, who as Secretary signed the Articles of Incorporation of the Society on August 11, 1854, and to admiration of the devotion of the recent President, my dear friend, Sarah Adams Krick.

Carol Green Wilson

July, 1952


## Acknowledgments

Sincere thanks are due to Mrs. Frederick Potter, granddaughter of Mrs. Nathaniel Gray; to Mrs. John Cushing, niece of Miss Anna Beaver; to Mr. A. Porter Robinson, grandson of Mr. Horace Hawes, for data about Mr. Hawes; and to Mr. James Hutchinson for his account of the Hutchinson family in its relation to the Society.


## Introduction

In writing the Early History of the San Francisco Ladies' Protection and Relief Society, which was organized in 1853, my only sources of information have been an account found in Mrs. Nathaniel Gray's writing desk after her death; the minutes of meetings, monthly, executive, and special, vnitten in longhand in six large volumes beginning with the first recorded meeting held on September 30, 1857, and ending December 4, 1925; also one printed book containing annual reports, treasurers' reports, interesting lists of money, food and supplies given by generous merchants and citizens, the names of officers and boards of managers, boards of trustees up to and including the Annual Report of 1924, changes in the Constitution, lists of members of the Society-Annual, Life and Honorary; a few letters, clippings, and other items found tucked away in these early records.

It has been an interesting task, although difficult to keep the records straight and yet reveal the dramatic story which threads its way through minutes and reports giving a picture of the hardships endured by people coming to California in the wild and exciting days of the Gold Rush years of the '50's and of San Francisco as it grew through the years into the modern city of today.

The Society was unique in the type of aid it gave to those in distress and want:

* It was not an orphanage, although it took care of many children.
* It was not an old people's home, but had old people living there.
* It was not an associated charities, although it paid rents and doctors' bills and provided food and shelter for the needy.
* It was the first employment agency in San Francisco.

The work of the Society has never been stereotyped, it has an elastic constitution.

In 1925 the Society moved (for the third time), into the handsome brick building designed by the well-known architect, Miss Julia Morgan. This home, at 3400 Laguna Street, is surrounded by a beautiful garden. It still takes care of women and children. It is now a permanent Home for gentlewomen of increasing years and has a convalescent department where women and children may stay until strong enough to go home or back to work.

As we enter the portals of this modern home we bring to a close the historical chronicle. However, it continues to be history-in-the-making, and some future historian must carry on the story.

Rowena Beans


## Chapter One ~ "For Ladies in Need..." ~ 1853-1863

The plight of a distraught newcomer was responsible for the formation of the San Francisco Ladies' Protection and Relief Society in 1853. This young lady who had braved the tedious Clipper voyage around the Horn ran, breathless and bareheaded, up the wooden steps of a cottage where she had seen a friendly face in the window.
Mrs. A. B. Eaton, wife of an Army Major, opened the door and listened to the girl's sobbing story. Her brother had failed to meet her-perhaps he had gone to the mines-maybe he was dead. A steamer acquaintance had directed her to a house which she had sensed at once was no place for a lady. Would Mrs. Eaton give her protection until she could trace her brother? &mdas

The girl was fortunate in her choice. The Eatons were among the pioneer citizens who were trying to lift the level of society in that roisterous young city still resounding with the clinking of gold on its gaming tables and glasses in its saloons. Major Eaton was on the Board of Howard Presbyterian Church built in Happy Valley in 1851. His pastor, Dr. Samuel H. Willey, had recently started a mission school—the College of California—later developed into the great University. Dr. Willey, the first Protestant missionary in the State of the Padres, had arrived in 1849. He was sensitive to the spiritual needs of this community which in four years had acquired a population of some 50,000 men and women of widely differing origins. There were 5,000 Germans and a like number of French, 1,500 negroes, 3,000 Chinese. About 8,000 females and 300 children were outnumbered by the preponderance of men between the ages of 20 and 40.

There was no question that young ladies needed protection. One daughter of an anxious New York family took her problems to Dr. Willey. Her only brother had joined the trek to California, against the advice and wishes of their parents, bringing with him a stock of goods to open a store. But a fever laid him low soon after his arrival and this girl had journeyed across the dangerous Isthmus of Panama determined to nurse him back to health. She arrived to watch him die. Strangers directed her to Dr. Willey, who conducted the funeral and introduced her to Judge Waller to settle the brother's business affairs. She, like the girl who found Mrs. Eaton, was lucky, for the Wallers took her into their family, befriended her in many ways, and finally saw her married to Mr. Beeching, agent of the San Francisco Benevolent Society. But in 1853 that organization had not come into being. There were, however, eighteen churches, two government hospitals, an almshouse, several orphanages, and some secret and racial benevolent societies. None of these offered the kind of shelter needed by the young ladies who had come to Mrs. Eaton and her pastor.

Accordingly on August 4, 1853, Mrs. Eaton gathered a church full of her acquaintances to discuss plans for constructive aid to women in need or distress, whether residents or strangers in San Francisco. The gathering was held in Trinity Episcopal Church on Pine Street between Montgomery and Kearny. This church, organized in 1849, as the fourth Protestant congregation in the city, had already become one of the most prominent. Representatives of its predecessors- the First Presbyterian, First Baptist, and First Congregational (all begun in '49)-joined with ladies from the newer churches.

All were agreed upon the urgency of providing protection for the women who were arriving in increasing numbers on every steamer, following pioneer husbands, brothers and sweethearts. Some found well stocked larders in homes waiting for them along the planked streets that wound up the hills from Portsmouth Square.

But there were always those others whose journey had ended with sorrow. For some of these there was not even the solace of a tombstone. Although in 1850 the Ayuntamiento (Town Council) had set aside a tract between the town and the Mission to be called Yerba Buena Cemetery, people had been so much in a hurry to get rid of their dead that they were hastily put out of sight behind bushes or tents until some passerby or neighbor dug a hole. No records were kept, no inquests. Men just dropped out of sight and their distant families cherished forlorn hopes.

The women who met on that August day were farseeing and intelligent. The constitution drawn up for the San Francisco Ladies' Protection and Relief Society has served with very few changes for a hundred years. Its object– 'to render protection and assistance to strangers, to sick and dependent women and children" was made the individual responsibility of each member of the Society. To insure this, Article X specified "it shall be the duty of all members of the Society to search out the condition of the poor, the sick and needy women and children, as they may have opportunity, and to report their circumstances and necessities to any member of the Board."

A Board of Managers numbering twenty-four was to carry on the essential work of the Society, meeting once a month between the yearly gatherings of the organization.

Three kinds of membership, Annual at $5.00, Honorary at $20.00, and Life at $50.00, helped increase the income which, during the formative years, was very uncertain; and also kept alive an interest in this struggling philanthropy. Many distinguished citizens were members.

For the first year the work was experimental. Proteges were boarded in homes of needy poor, thus extending assistance two ways. The office on Sacramento Street, below Kearny, was centrally located. Soon it became a clearing house, not only for relief, but also the first employment office in the city. Household help was scarce and the wives of the newly rich clamored for the services of girls in need of work.

The kindly Board members who volunteered their time and advice would ask bewildered young mothers with toddlers clinging to their skirts or babies cuddled in their arms, "What can you do?"

Many a frightened answer came, "I can't do anything. I was never brought up to work. I can't so much as wash a pocket handkerchief."

Yet, here they were, not intentionally deserted by their husbands, but left without funds, while the men, unable to find other jobs, had gone to the mines.

The older women supplied immediate needs and encouraged the younger ones to help themselves as soon as they could, paying for the care of the little ones in the interim.

At the First Annual Meeting on August 9, 1854, Articles of Incorporation were presented and a group of five men– William H. Dow, VVilliam A. Darling, Samuel M. Bowman, J. B. Crockett and A. B. Eaton were elected to serve as Directors. This certificate, signed by Mary Ann Darling, President, and Catherine D. Kellogg, Secretary, was recorded in the San Francisco County records on May 28, 1855.

Very soon these energetic women realized that merely maintaining an office was not sufficient. One of the Board members, Mrs. E. B. Goddard, proposed at a summer meeting in 1857 that the Society should have a home for the women and children who needed shelter. There were few reputable boarding houses and hotels where it was safe for women to stay while waiting for employment–or for the husbands off at the mines. Nevertheless, some of the Board opposed the suggestion. The debate became violent. The President, Mrs. Holbrook, and Mrs. Darling, then SecretaryTreasurer, threatened to resign if the Society insisted upon this rash undertaking. By a majority of two the vote was cast in favor. The defeated officers swept from the room, never to take any further part in the affairs of the Society.

Thereupon, the seven remaining members reorganized, electing their former Vice-President, Mrs. Nathaniel Gray, as President and Mrs. Goddard, Secretary. Being women of direct action, they then adjourned the meeting to look for a suitable "home".

On September 30 the house-hunting committee reported that they had rented for $25 a month a dwelling at Second and Tehama Streets, ready for immediate possession. Generous gifts from the homes of members furnished the place quickly. Miss A. O. Strong was employed as Matron. One of the husbands of a Board member, Mr. McKee, drove a large wagon along Front Street, inviting merchants to contribute provisions of every sort for the new venture. Its shelves overflowing with food, its beds inviting, the city's first "Hospitality House" was soon ready for guests.

	Businesslike and wise in their understanding of human nature, the Board of Managers realized that the people who needed help could be reached more quickly by printed handbills than by a notice in the papers. They knew that curiosity would impel anyone to pick up dodgers fluttering about the streets and doorways. Their announcement read:
	"The office of the San Francisco Ladies' Protection and Relief Society is removed from 151 Sacramento Street to the corner of Second and Tehama Streets. All persons acquainted with any case of destitution or want are requested to give information at the office. All respectable women in want of protection, employment in families or as needle women, by applying at the office, will receive immediate attention. Families who need help in either of these departments of labor are also requested to apply to the agent at the office."

In their new President, Mrs. Nathaniel Gray, the Society had a leader qualified by inheritance and experience. A native of Brattleboro, Vermont, she had married a young New York lawyer in 1832. After a few years of law practice her husband had become a local missionary of the New York Tract Society. But as his family increased he found it necessary to earn more. Thus in 1850 he had joined the trek to California as agent for an undertaking firm, making the difficult trip on mule back across the Isthmus. After the equipment sent out by his firm was lost in a shipwreck during the voyage around the Horn, he bought the stock of the only undertaker in San Francisco—six coffins, a wagon with black curtains and a pair of black mules.

Two years later Mr. Gray had returned to New York for his family. With their second son, Henry and Anna Allianda, aged five, they undertook the perilous trip up the Chagres River on the Isthmus of Panama, the women and children on a small steamer towed by a scow which carried the ITIen. Part of the journey was made on mule back. When they finally arrived at Acapulco the town was crowded with passengers who should have departed on the previous steamer, wrecked enroute. The shabby hotel was filled to capacity. New arrivals slept without bedding; the women and children on cots, the men on benches or the floor. Passengers already on board agreed to accept half rations of food and water in order that newcomers among women and children could have space on the steamer at the dock. No wonder Mrs. Gray's sympathy went out to lonely girls in overcrowded San Francisco!

Her Presidency of the Board of Managers of the Ladies' Protection and Relief Society, begun only five years after her arrival, in her new far western home, continued for thirty years of wise and constructive leadership; but no part of her service was more important than that rendered in this first year. Then she brought peace and harmony where there had been discord, laying the foundation for an organization of unlimited value in the city to which both she and her husband gave bountifully to every good cause.

Two other women whose names are part of California history came onto the Board that year. On November I l, 1857 , the group elected Mrs. Thomas O. Larkin, whose husband was the first American Consul in California while the territory still belonged to Mexico, and Mrs. James King, wife of the Editor-reformer of the San Francisco Evening Bulletin — known as James King of William.

The thrifty philanthropists who constituted the Board of Managers were questioning the wisdom of paying rent. In February, 1858, a committee was assigned the task of looking for a suitable building site, and the next month the Trustees were invited to consult on the advisability of purchasing a home.

The following year, May I l, 1859, Mrs. Gray announced that one of the Board, Mrs. Denny, had approached a generous citizen, Mr. Horace Hawes, with the suggestion that he give a lot to the Society.

This New Yorker had arrived in 1848, enroute to the Sandwich Islands as the first American Consul, but had succumbed to the excitement of the Gold Rush days. He had let his ship sail without him, remaining to become Prefect of the first Supreme Court of California, later District Attorney of San Francisco and the author of the Consolidated Act of the City and County of San Francisco.

Not only was he an influential citizen, but also one of its most philanthropic, a man whose tolerance made him honored in Catholic and Protestant circles alike. His gifts of land to the Catholic Church won him a medal from Pope Pius I X. Now he willingly offered land to this Protestant-sponsored charity, stipulating that the Society should never mortgage or otherwise endanger the title—a provision chat has placed the Society on sound footing through all of its hundred years.

A year passed, however, before the final acceptance of Mr. Hawes' offer gave the Society this great asset. On July 10, 1860, a square block bounded by Van Ness, Geary, Franklin and Post was deeded to the institution.
In the meantime, after looking at various properties, the Board decided to purchase the James W. Parks home on Tehama Street as a temporary dwelling. In January, 1860, they voted to ask the State Legislature for $5,000 toward this pur-
chase. Instead of sending one of the men on the Board of Trustees to present their petition these wise ladies entrusted the mission to one of their own number—Mrs. A. B. Reese.

Draping her paisley shawl over her shoulders and tucking a rose under the brim of her poke bonnet, this gentle lady departed for Sacramento on the River boat. Her soft voice appealing for the helpless women and children, who by now were coming in increasing numbers to the haven on Tehama Street, impressed the legislators sufficiently to win more than half of what she requested. She returned with $3,000 toward the purchase of a Home.

Then the twelve women now left on the Board set out to raise the balance, directed by the group not to return without at least $200 apiece. All but two reached the goal; three each collected $500 and one, $700. Early minutes list their names and the amounts they brought in:

Mrs. L. L. Baker 	$275
Mrs. Archibold		200
Mrs. A. C. Nichols	200
Mrs. G. H. Kellogg	556
Mrs. Gray			200
Mrs. Pedar Sather	300
Mrs. E. B. Goddard	500
Mrs. S. B. Stoddard	200
Mrs. Denny			150
Mrs. Pect			 50
Mrs. Alex Forbes	780
Mrs. A. B. Reese	556

The house and repairs cost $6,369.00 but the work expanded so fast that in two years this first home was outgrown. The land deeded to the Society by Mr. Hawes was in the new Western Addition, as yet virtually in the country. The rapidly growing city had now reached Larkin Street, with one improved street—Bush—extended to reach the new Laurel Hill Cemetery far out in the sandy lupine-covered wastes.

Undaunted, the courageous Board of Managers undertook to raise sufficient funds for the building of an adequate home
on their newly-acquired sand dunes. One of the well-known architects of the community, Mr. S. C. Bugbee, contributed his talents to the cause, presenting them with plans and specifications for the building that would mean home to thousands of orphans, half-orphans and abandoned children, as well as temporary shelter for hundreds of needy women of all ages for the next sixty-five years.

At first, however, only the northern wing was attempted. The public, convinced now that the Society was filling a much needed place in the community, was generous in response to appeals for the building fund. A Metropolitan Bazaar, held at Platt's Hall during the winter, netted a successful furnishing fund.

When construction began in the winter of 1862—3 the first undertaking was a plank road over which building materials could be transported for the two blocks beyond Larkin Street, and a wooden sidewalk along the Post Street boundary of the lots.

Once more an appeal was made to the State Legislature and two Board members, Miss M. C. Fessenden and Mrs. Stiles, made the trip to Sacramento. A promise of $3,000 available a few months hence was some help, but regarded as entirely inadequate for the contemplated purpose.

Miss Fessenden's secretarial report for the year 1862 reveals the changing character of the work. She records that "The Home was become our most effective and indispensable instrumentality. It has afforded protection and comfort to a larger number than any previous year. A majority of its inmates have been children rescued from filth, poverty and wretchedness, whose living parents brutalized by intemperance and vice, had neglected or forsaken them...during the year the home has sheltered 25 women and 65 children..." A school had been established, with plans for its continuance provided the Society could raise enough to pay a teacher.

The problem of finding good homes for children under the care of the Society was eased by an Act of the Legislature
(April 10, 1858) giving the Managers authority to bind out, on proper conditions, any child under their care until of age —or for a shorter period.

Miss Fessenden's account shows that the Home was only a part of the Society's welfare program. The group continued to minister to the sick, needy and unfortunate in all parts of the city. Since the winter just passed had been one of great severity, the increased cost of everything necessary to the support of a family, and the difficulty of finding employment had caused suffering and destitution. The Society had paid rents, in whole or part, for many of such needy families, in addition to buying provisions and providing nurses and medical attendance, clothing and fuel for fifty-one families, thus assisting 131 children.

The Rush to the Caribou and Salmon rivers had left many women and children unprotected and destitute; while refugees from Sacramento and other interior cities had added extra burdens.

The tenth annual report, that of 1863, shows increasing responsibilities. At the same time careful budgeting in the use of funds entrusted to them was evident. For the fourteen months covered by the report, figures show less than $13 cost per person aided, including the Home and community service. The secretary commented proudly, "No estimate can be furnished of the assistance rendered by donations of second hand clothing, groceries and provisions which have been sent in by the friends of the Society, and which have materially contributed to our resources. Still after due allowance for this kind of aid, we do not believe a parallel can be produced for economy in the use of charitable funds. '

Among the friends thanked specifically for donations the name of Mr. Samuel C. Harding appears for the first time. Throughout the years, this kindly gentleman became a veritable Santa Claus. Each Christmas week he would enlist the assistance of the Morton Drayage Company. With these trucks and teams he drove from store to store asking for donations. "Sam Harding Day" became a gala event as the train of teams laden with groceries, provisions, drugs, drygoods, wood and willow ware arrived at the Home. The ladies of the Board, with scores of delighted children, would greet him at the door. Then all would join in a praise service of thanks for the God-given necessaries for the coming year.
Others who received special thanks were R. R. Swain, who made it his responsibility to supply bread, cake and crackers from his large bakery, and the newspapers, A Ita and Bulletin, for their continued aid in gratuitous publication of notices and the many articles that had helped arouse public support.

Miss Fessenden reported a system of tickets which had been instituted during the past three months:

	"These are furnished by the Managers at three dollars per dozen, and the plan has thus far worked successfully. The purchaser of our tickets has the satisfaction of knowing that his money will be most economically expended in the relief of real want, and upon none but the worthy. We are pledged to investigate the case of every female or child who comes to us with one of our tickets; if deserving, all the aid required will be extended. Many, who would cheerfully relieve want, cannot devote the time necessary to know whether their gifts would be worthily bestowed. By this plan, their charities are certain to do good, and a most effectual check is put upon street begging. It is our belief, if our citizens would generally adopt the rule of only giving one of our tickets to the child or woman soliciting charity, the entire class of imposters among them would be gotten rid of, and only the deserving left."

Her paragraph about children indicates the growing tendency to concentrate on that phase of the work:

	"Desirable places have been found in good families in the country for nine children, since our last report. It is the wish and intention of the Board of Managers, as soon as possible, to provide homes for the children left to their care, where they will be properly brought up, instructed in some useful occupation, receive a good common school education, be removed from the evil influences of the city, and especially from the influence of idle, dissolute, and intemperate parents. We are fully persuaded that in this way we can best promote their happiness and usefulness in this life, and their future well-being."

## Chapter Two ~ "A Permanently Established Charity" ~ 1864-1874

Eleven years after the breathless girl had sobbed out her story to Mrs. Eaton, the San Francisco Ladies' Protection and Relief Society was housed in the commodious building erected in the Western Addition. The report of 1865 summarized the effect of this move as having "secured for our institution a position among the other noble charities of our city ... it is no longer an experiment but presents itself as a permanently established charity, well adapted to the wants of a large city, with constantly widening fields for usefulness, which we are only restricted from entering as efficiently as we desire on account of the narrowness of the means at our disposal."

Since the Home now had become a large institution with many children in its care, rigid house rules were prepared and posted. Reading these regulations gives a picture quite the antithesis of the usual concept of San Francisco of the '60s.
* "No visitor shall be admitted on Sunday, either to see the matron, teacher, or hired persons; and none may stay in the house, except by written permit of one of the Executive Committee."
* "All unnecessary cooking, or other secular work, to be avoided on Sunday."
* "All clothing to be prepared on Saturday."
...
* "The children at meals always to raise the hand, and wait until the matron or teacher is ready to serve them. They shall enter and retire in regular order; also wash their hands and aces after every meal."
* "Parents and friends may visit their children the first Thursday in the month, and at no other time, unless a special permission is granted by one of the Committee on Admissions."
The semblance of a family was preserved in the regulation that specified that "every inmate of sufficient age shall, after putting her own clothes in order, appropriate a suitable portion of time to manual labor while she remains and be under the control and direction of the matron ... she will keep her room well arranged; wash the paint once a week; be neat and tidy in dress and person; industrious during working hours and listen to the advice given by the managers, matron, or visitors."
In every way the Managers of the Society encouraged personal effort on the part of those they aided. Their constant purpose was to give temporary relief, and never to allow anyone to dispense with her own efforts. Their motto was to encourage, to cheer, to incite to new exertions. For most of those who came in discouragement and despair, they were able to substitute hope, energy, industry.
Tolerance was another rule. Among the recipients of aid were representatives of nearly every nationality gathered in the cosmopolitan city. While San Francisco was far removed from the War-Between-the-States across the continent, the secretary noted that "it has been our privilege to care for three children of one who has been nobly serving his country for two years past in the Army of the Potomac. The Ladies' Patriotic Society has contributed toward the support of those children.'
By 1867 it was possible to say that the Society had never been in more prosperous condition. Two hundred thirty nine women and children were cared for in the Home that year, and seventeen children had been placed in good homes in the country—"with the Society still keeping watch over them."
Mrs. Bugbee, wife of the architect, had now become secretary. Her report of September 12, 1867, pictures the sym pathetic approach to "many women who are helpless through those misfortunes which so often and so suddenly, in this land of reverses, afflict the most respectable and industrious; to those delicate and refined women who are left penniless, perhaps friendless and homeless upon our shores, and more especially to those sensitive natures who shrink from asking public charity, yet through weakness and weariness are unable to fight life's battle unaided. Much of the good we have been able, through God's providence, to accomplish, is recorded only in the grateful hearts of its recipients, and the pen that describes it robs it of its sacredness and beauty."
In acknowledging many gifts and services to the Society, Mrs. Bugbee mentions the special gratitude of the Board to Mrs. Lizzie Bell who had selected this Society as the recipient of the fund she had collected on the Pacific Coast for the benefit of orphans of soldiers of the Civil War. It amounted to $7,500.
As the city became aware of the good accomplished by this Society, the press gave more space to accounts of its work. The Alta for Sunday, May 24, 1868, devoted several columns to a story of a visit...
	"Seldom," wrote the correspondent, "have we been so much interested and awakened to the sublime consideration of disinterested charity as when we observed the living evidences of Christian care and tenderness there displayed. Bright-eyed children to the number of over a hundred, neatly and warmly clad, sported in the large open yard in all the simple confidence of childhood at home.
	"The history of any one of them is full of interest, but one case particularly attracted our attention—that of five little girls recently admitted. The parents started with them a few months since to come to California; the mother died early in the passage, and the father reaching Panama, grieved and discouraged, was about to turn back, when he heard of this institution. He came on and sought admission for his children. They are now enjoying the care and comforts of a pleasant home, while he is left at liberty to exert himself in their behalf.
	"We cannot dwell upon individual cases, but will assure the reader that in a visit to this institution he can find objects of interest and sympathy to touch the most obdurate heart. Visitors are welcomed and shown every attention. The site is elevated and healthy and commands a fine view of the city, bay and country.
	"The present building, which is only one wing of the contemplated structure, is imposing in appearance, and occupies one corner of the square donated to this Society by Mr. Hawes. The kitchen, laundry, dining room and a small school room are in the basement. These we visited first. It being dinner time, we entered the dining room and saw the babies at dinner. These younger children dine first, the older ones waiting on them, after which they are served themselves. The food was plain, wholesome and well prepared, and was apparently well relished by the little eaters.
	"On the first floor are the parlors, sewing rooms, wardrobe, Matron's rooms, etc. On the second and third floors are dormitories and teachers' rooms. Everywhere the most scrupulous neatness was observed. The smaller children are taught in the school room in the basement, but the larger ones, about eighty or ninety in number, are at present taught in a portion of the barn, temporarily furnished for the purpose. The decorum of the scholars and the readiness with which they responded to their teacher, was truly pleasing. They sang several pieces for us, one a Union song, in excellent time and voice, 'No East, no West, no North, no South,' which we wish might be taught in every school in the city.
	"A suitable school room is much needed as well as other and more extensive room to meet the demands. It is the purpose of these indefatigable ladies to commence at once the erection of the main building designed in the original plan. This is to be a square structure, occupying the center of the grounds and uniting the two wings, one of which is the present building. It is to contain a large school r001T1, and other apartments at present so much needed. The Managers are compelled daily to turn away deserving applicants and to discriminate closely in those they admit, for want of room to accommodate all, and they feel that their usefulness is being limited by this means. The only test of the applicant is necessity—no sectarian principles or nationalities are favored.
	"Sufficient cannot be said of the noble disinterestedness of the ladies who have cared for and conducted this institution. The funds have been judiciously managed, and have yielded well, so that the Managers are enabled to commence the erection of the main building with a capital of $10,000. The estimated cost of completing the outside, and sufficiently inside for present purposes, is $15,000.
	"For the deficiency of their means they rely upon the liberality of the people of San Francisco, and in this we trust they will not be disappointed. We feel confident if the people knew from observation the conduct of this institution, they would be impressed with the importance of sustaining it. The children, as a matter of course, are mostly taken from the lower grades of society, where, in many cases, filth and immorality abound, and are at once transplanted to this healthy, and moral atmosphere, to grow up useful citizens.
	"Could the truth be known, we venture to say that the moderate means asked for would be more than returned in savings from the trial and support of criminals induced by the prospective lives of the would-be beneficiaries of this institution. This is purely a financial view of the subject, but, we fear, too much of the Californian view, losing sight of the moral and intellectual elevation obtained. How important, in this city, that vies with every other in infidelity and corruption, that we should cultivate and encourage all means that tend to moral and social elevation. Here are combined moral, intellectual and domestic instruction, with perfect neatness of person and apartment, and when of suitable age the children are indentured, or placed to work under the auspices of the Managers, who do not lose sight of them or relinquish their interest in them .
Mrs. George H. Barstow, whose husband later became a judicial leader, took up her colorful pen to record the progress of the Society in 1869:
	"Seventeen years ago," she wrote in the Annual Report, 'the Ladies Protection and Relief Society commenced its work of love and mercy in San Francisco. During that period, the city, which was then but a handful, has grown to a population of a hundred and fifty thousand. By the indomitable energy of its people it has attained a degree of commercial prosperity which excites the wonder of the world. This Society has advanced with the onward march of the city.
	"Annually it has rendered to its patrons an account of its stewardship, and told them how it has dispensed their bounties—and constantly looking to the Father of Mercies to bless its endeavors, it has continued its work to this hour. But with the increase of population and commercial greatness has come an increase of all the saddening causes which throw helpless children and destitute women upon the charities of the world. Noble and liberal as its helpers have been, and none were ever more so, still larger have been its needs, and now it stands with an almost empty treasury, while it is full to overflowing with the children of want, and more are waiting to come.
	"The causes which bring them are as varied as the disasters and vicissitudes of human life. Some are deserted by an abandoned mother, or a vagabond father, and are outcasts. Some come by sudden sickness of parents—the death of a father or mother in poverty, rash speculation, the gaming table, or the curse of drunkenness. And thus the little mariners have come to us, shipwrecked, from all the storms of life, and there are 173 of them in the Home today."
	"There is a necessity to explain more fully the dispensation made of your bounty, than in that sister charity, the Orphan Asylum. The name of orphan is a key to every heart. But there are sorrows more complicated, and helplessness as complete, and destitution as bitter as theirs. A dead father is better than one who is a drunkard or a vagabond, or the inmate of a prison."
	"The Home is open also to infirm and destitute women; three of these, including one very aged Scotch lady, are sheltered there at the present time. The reason for having so few adults, is that it is the policy of the Managers to extend aid only temporarily to adults, when they are overwhelmed by sudden misfortune, and are in actual destitution; but as soon as they are able to help themselves they are expected to leave, and make room for others requiring the same aid..."
	"Among the children are three who were deserted and thrown out into the street, and became wanderers. They were allowed by a kind, noble-hearted woman, who kept a fruit stand for a livelihood, to come to her and get their food. They slept amongst wood-piles and became so incrusted with filth as to repulse all but the most benevolent hearts. Cleaned and clothed, fed and sheltered in the Home, they have become so changed as hardly to be recognized by those who knew them in their squalor and rags. Such as these come to us, unconscious victims of the vices and crimes of society .
	"Take the Michigan family as a type of the distressing circumstances which sometimes overtake strangers. They were residents of Detroit, and resolved to move to California; so they sold all that they had to get the means of removing. The father started in advance of the wife and children, but left them provided with steamer tickets, and soon to follow him. He was robbed at Greytown, and died on his arrival here. Before the mother left Michigan one child died, but like a true wife she resolved to follow her husband, and arrived here only to find him dead and herself penniless, with two little children. They were brought to the Home, and she made herself so useful in the nursery that she was made permanent nurse, and now twenty little motherless children gather round the bereaved woman as if they were her own.
	"One case more. A man from Australia arrived in San Francisco with five children. The mother had died suddenly before they embarked. He placed his children at the Home, and went forth among strangers to seek employment, and often came to see them. At last he failed to visit them at the accustomed time. His disappearance was looked into, and it was found that he died at the pest-house, a victim of smallpox. The children have been adopted, one after the other, in good homes, and to all appearances are growing up to be useful men and women.
	"Our records furnish another case by no means exceptional in a commercial city. A merchant, once affluent and influential, failed, through extravagance and folly. His children were brought to the Home. Taken from an atmosphere of reckless indulgence, they have been transplanted by adoption, into homes of virtue and industry, and bid fair to retrieve more than their father lost.
	"But it is not necessary to particularize further the causes which fill the Home. They arise out of the common, everyday grinding sorrows of life, which overpower and crush human nature. And where shall the victims go? There are no established and endowed houses of refuge for them here, as in the older States, or Government asylums, as in Europe. Shall they be left to perish? They are of many nationalities, for the charities of the Society are not bounded by nationality, or hemmed in by the narrow limits of creed. Being children of the same Heavenly Father, and in need, they are welcomed without any invidious exception.
	"Good discipline in the household is maintained by kindly holding a steady rein, without harshness, and without resorting to cruel or unusual punishments.
	"The instruction and discipline in the school are of such a character as to excite their moral virtues, and make them better, while they give them intelligence enough to aid them in the launch into life. We aim to make the Home such in all its workings, that instead of being to them a reproach, something in their lives which they should wish to conceal, it shall be, on the contrary, a recommendation to them and a ground of self respect, that they have been in so benign an institution; that it shall be to them an endorsement, and not a brand. In the school they are taught reading, spelling, penmanship, arithmetic, and geography. The girls are also taught sewing, and they work about the house so as practically to learn good housekeeping, including neatness and economy.
	"If the people of San Francisco could look in upon these children of the public at dinner time, with their tin cups and common plates, and in their plain attire, eating at plain tables; if they could see them at the Home, fed with simple, wholesome, nutritious food, not one laggard appetite amongst them, as they march in and file off to their appointed places at the table; if they could look in upon their schoolroom, the boys on one side and the girls on the other, like the old-fashioned country schools of New England; if they could see them march from the school-room to the door that opens upon the playground, when with one merry shout they break away into joyous, happy, healthy sport; if they could see the girls, busy at their housework, and the older boys at out-door work, and all being fitted for useful men and women; if they could read the mottoes upon the walls, 'Never too late to mend,' 'A fault confessed is half redressed,' 'Find a way or make a way'; if the people would only examine and see how all is done at this Home, surely the citizens of San Francisco, who have so often contributed money heretofore, would continue their aid to the children of the public.
	"And this leads me to speak of what becomes of them. They are of tender ages, ranging from eighteen months to twelve years. Most of them when they leave are adopted by families, chiefly married persons who have no children of their own. The boys, who have reached the age of twelve years without being adopted or withdrawn by their friends, are then put out to farmers, to be brought up to a life of agriculture, with the advantage of a good common school education. The power to do this is given to the Society by law, with power to make a legal contract, in every case, binding upon both parties, care being taken to secure places where their treatment will be parental, and to find out afterward if it be so. We receive from time to time the most gratifying assurances of their good conduct and happiness. In that way the beneficiaries of this institution are scattered throughout the Pacific States, although the larger portion is to be found in California in the counties of Alameda, San Mateo, Marin, Santa Clara, Monterey, Sonoma, Solano, and Napa.
	"The kind of families selected for girls to be placed in are honest, kind people, where they will be under good influences, and brought up to honor industry by the practice of it. In most cases they become as their own children, so much so that if there becomes a necessity, from any cause, to sever the relation, it is like the parting of parent and child. Thus every month some are coming and some are leaving, and the process is constantly going on. They come to us in every form of destitution. They go forth restored, made comfortable, and unless we are deceived, to a good destination.
	"Some of the boys show signs of mechanical genius, and some evince a talent for drawing. Without instruction, one little fellow drew the figure of a locomotive, and another of a woman hailing a street car. But as yet we have found no way in which such can learn trades, although there might be one of the number having the genius of a Watt, or a Fulton, or a Morse. Thus many a boy may fail of the destiny nature intended for him. Many a skillful manufacturer, or great inventor, is lost to the State, and, as an individual, the boy becomes less useful to himself and less successful in after life.
	"What we want money for now is to buy food and clothing. There are so many mouths to fill that we require from twelve to fifteen barrels of flour per month, one sack of potatoes per day, and, in proportion, other garden vegetables. Are there no generous farmers who, if the crops are abundant, will send us sacks of wheat and potatoes from the agricultural counties? We receive destitute women and children from any and every county, if they apply. And the gardeners, whose fine vegetables appear every morning in our markets, have they no beans, carrots, parsnips, or cabbages, for the home of the homeless ones? If every gardener who is able would send us something, the aggregate would be great; or if one farmer in five would send us a sack of wheat, or flour, or meal, or cracked wheat, or some hay for the cows which we keep, it would aid us materially in this trying time. The address is 'Home of the Ladies' Protection and Relief Society, corner of Post and Franklin Streets.' We shall be glad to know the county, ranch, or garden, from which the donation comes, and the name of the donor.
	"The building is a plain, large structure, standing on a commanding eminence overlooking all the southern portion of the city. The center and one wing are up, leaving the other wing unbuilt. It now contains fifty rooms, and with the exception of a few necessarily devoted to general uses, every available foot of space is occupied with beds for the children. It is not an institution struggling to get into existence, but to continue its life. It has been partially endowed by the generosity of some noble citizens. Our merchants, bankers, and professional men—indeed, all classes and occupations—have contributed generously when we have appealed to them. Some are monthly contributors, thus steadily manifesting their philanthropy by their aid. They give quietly, without ostentation, but their names are well known at the Home, and are kept in grateful remembrance.
	"A debt is a threatening cloud over any home, and it is the same over this Home of the homeless. By the wise foresight of the Hon. Horace Hawes, who gave the institution all its valuable land in perpetuity, it was provided, as a condition of the gift that no mortgage, or burdensome lien, should be put upon it, and that none of it should be sold for many years to come, thus insuring the property against being improvidently incumbered or squandered in the infancy of the Society, before it had become strong enough to stand alone. Thus, by his thoughtful philanthropy, a society which has so great a future has no way to raise money on its property now, and it owes a debt of $5,000. But it has its fine building, four stories in height, the center portion fifty feet square, and the wing forty-eight by eighty-one feet.
	"To support its children and destitute women it relies upon voluntary contributions, a small income from the land, and appropriations by the Legislature, which has laid claim again and again to our gratitude, and the gratitude of hundreds of young hearts, made glad by the bounty of the State. The unwearied Samuel C. Harding has annually established his claim to our thanks, by the contributions which he has obtained, and sometimes when thev were sorely needed, and no other help was near. Also, we are under obligations to Dr. Holman and Dr. Mouser, for professional services gratuitously rendered.
	"Today there are but Forty Dollars in the treasury, and the bills of the last month remain unpaid. To San Francisco's generous people, who have never been appealed to in vain, another appeal must be made. How great, how rich, how strong the city stands by the sea! WVill it not attend to the cause of the weak? Will those who have homes remember those who have none? Will San Francisco go marching on to grasp the commerce of Asia, while behind her the wail of want is heard? Will California, whose praises are upon the tongues of visitors from afar, and strangers from the ends of the earth—will California refuse an appeal for aid to little children, for whom our laws and institutions provide no resource? Shall it be said that in a State whose glorious vintage and yellow harvests now adorning the landscape, challenge the admiration of the world, there can be found women unsheltered, and children who ask for food and are not fed? Shall the cry of want be heard rising higher than the grain elevators, while the destitute look out and see great ships go forth laden with wheat to other lands, so that it seems to them as if the genius of Abundance were departing, and the genius of Want were staying at home.
In 1872, Mrs. Barstow sums up the first 20 years of this Society.
"During that period," she writes, "the world has seen arise on these Pacific shores a new empire, having for its business center the City of San Francisco. While this almost miraculous growth has been going on, the mishaps of adventure, accidents, sickness and discouragements, che struggle with hardness and poverty, sharp temptations, by which many have fallen, for a time, and the depravity of some who love vice and cling to it, have been constantly breaking up families, and leaving young children without support and without home.
	"To meet this want, this Society was formed; and while in the law its corporate name is the Ladies' Protection and Relief Society, in the popular mind it has taken the more appropriate name of Ladies' Home; for the thought at the foundation is, that it shall be a home for the friendless and destitute. In its great need today for more space and more means to do good, its appeal to those who have beautiful, happy homes is, 'Will you do something for the neglected and outcast.'
	"Its mission is, first to provide for the immediate wants of the children, and then to obtain for them homes in good kind families, where they will be brought up to habits of industry and thrift. To show how its mission has been fulfilled, it is only necessary to point to the once forsaken boys and girls, now happily planted in good families, scattered throughout the State of California, where many have become sons and daughters by adoption, and are also, so far as we can learn, growing up to be a blessing and a support, rather than a burden and a curse to the State.
	"Also, it frequently happens that the children are restored to their own parents, who have become prosperous enough to provide for them, and thus have been brought about many happy reunions of families, once scattered and separated by misfortune. Sometimes these restorations take place through chains of events, which no one could have foreseen.
	"An aged woman arrived from Boston, one evening, by the overland train. She appeared at the Home, and instantly selected her little grandson from our group, a lost child, long mourned as dead, news of whom had accidentally reached her; he had been sheltered in the Ladies' Home in San Francisco. In twenty-four hours she set out, with a glad heart, bearing home the prize, the happiest of the happy.
	"One of our older girls heard, suddenly, news of her long absent father. She had had the advantages of our school. She wrote him a letter, referring to events of her childhood and her mother, touching the springs of memory in him so as to leave no doubt in his mind of her identity. She worked upon the yet unextinguished spark of affection in his heart, and induced him to do justice to her. He sent for her, through a foreign consul, and now father and daughter are happily united.
	"While this Society gathers up its beneficiaries through all the wide range of disaster, vicissitude and misfortune, it makes no invidious distinctions among them. No matter what may be their nationality, the religion of their parents, or the place or accident of their birth, whether Christian, Jew, Infidel, Pagan, or Mohammedan, if they are little children, helpless, forsaken, and in want, that is in itself a passport against which the Ladies' Home has never shut its door.
	"Thus it is now filled with 160 children. At the end of last year, 175 remained in the Home, 128 have entered during the year, and 143 have been dismissed. The average number during the year has been 173. The technical name of orphan is not necessary to gain admittance for them. Those who have such parents that it were better they were orphans, are freely admitted here, and they are of all ages, from infancy to boyhood and girlhood.
	"It is the theory and practice of this Society, that the best way to help the needy, is to help them to help themselves. Guided by this maxim, the rule of the Managers is, that every boy and girl, when arrived at suitable age, shall be taught how to work, and shall have a good common school education. The girls are occupied a part of each day in school, and a part in housework and sewing. The boys also are kept at work and school alternately, as soon as they are old enough, but care is taken that all shall have plenty of wholesome recreation and play in the open air, on a commodious playground, which is the property of the Institution, and which it may not dispose of for many years to come.
	"The machinery of the household is regulated with marvelous efficiency by our inestimable matron, Miss C. A. Harmon, who represents a wise, kind, large-hearted mother to this great family. Our assistant matron, Miss M. McGladery, is giving the best years of her life to the children. She has proved herself, in time of sickness, an unwearied, devoted, skillful nurse. A tender mother could not do more.
	"Miss H. F. Stevens, the school teacher, is an enthusiast in her work, and is fitted for it. She is the children's friend. Under her influence, the dull are incited to learn enough to appear very well in life, and those who are eager for knowledge, have become such good scholars for their age, that if they were our own children, we might be justly proud of them. Charity is a beautiful thing when it relieves hunger and thirst; but that is inadequate to all a child's wants. It is temporary, and to be renewed every day. Our Home is a refuge, that lifts up the children and helps their souls, as well as their bodies. It renews and transforms them, and redeems them to the State; and as a proof of what their life is, they feel the same reluctance to leave us that sons and daughters feel in leaving a father's house. They go because they must and ought to go.
	"If a stranger should enter our school room, and look upon the boys grouped on one side, and the girls upon the other, he would naturally say the chances of the boys are the best; but our experience is the reverse of this. For many of the girls we easily find homes with childless people, where they are gladly welcomed, and are brought up as children of the
	household. Of those that remain until they are of an age to maintain themselves, natural taste and ingenuity will make one a milliner, or another a dressmaker. Also, as they are made proficient in housework while with us they are readily received into positions essentially the same as adopted daughters.
	"But with the boys the case is quite different. Now and then a farmer on some distant sheep ranch applies for a boy, or a dairyman, or a vine-dresser wants one, or some woman takes a small boy to her heart, with no motive but the joy of calling him son; and thus we sometimes place them where they will be well treated and well brought up. There is, however, a large number of boys left. For some of them we have done all we can do. One has arrived at apprentice age, and having but one leg, thinks he would like to be a shoemaker; and many others, drawing near that age, earnestly desire to earn their living by an honest trade.
	" 'If I could only earn,' they say among themselves. But the boy who would make shoes, or watches, or become a saddler, or a carpenter, must learn by persevering labor. Wherever we turn, labor leagues and trades' unions are arrayed against him. Employers say they find themselves fettered and hampered by their exactions. Their journeymen are bound not to allow more than a certain number of apprentices at a time, in any shop or foundry where they work. If they were to take another boy, all the workmen would leave in a body, even if in the midst of a contract half fulfilled, and so work their ruin. These men forget that it is not only the work of each generation to provide food, raiment, and shelter for the generation coming after, but to teach it all they know. What is wanted, is a chance for the young to expand in the way nature intended them to go.
	"A boy who would be a laggard at the plough, might become a brilliant inventor, or skilled in machinery. We do not take lads over twelve years of age, and it is our policy not to keep them after that time. Yet we cannot send them forth alone, without a plank to walk on, lest they become 'Hoodlums.' Will the public help us? Will the Legislature devise some means by which their wants may be met? Certainly a boy is an object of great interest, when he first begins to understand that the aims of industries are mutually helpful in promoting the prosperity of the State. Therefore, men of California, help our boys.
	"Remember your hopes, and fears, and aspirations, if orphans or friendless and deserted. Remember the strong preference that stirred within you for one occupation or craft more than for another, so that. you felt it easy and joyful to earn your bread in one way, and repulsive or well-nigh impossible in another.
	"We beseech you to aid us in planting out our boys. We would earnestly suggest engrafting upon our public schools some features of the polytechnic system so that apprenticeship should be recognized as part of the system of public instruction, so far at least, as to teach boys the rudiments of a trade and the use of tools, in order that they may be prepared to enter the workshop, on small wages, by an arrangement mutually profitable to master and apprentice. We would also suggest some legislative enactment, by which a poor boy, in a free country, may be allowed to learn a trade.
	"In addition to the adult women to whom we afford temporary protection and relief, while seeking some honest maintenance, we have two aged women resident with us. We have never been able to admit more, although frequent application is made on behalf of good women, who find themselves far away from their early homes, without kindred or any means to live. We all know that, to the aged, loss of property and friends is utter and irreparable. Many have even longed for the Lord to take them to some Mount Nebo, where they might die, out of sight. It is grievous for us to decline to receive those who turn their trembling steps to our Home, with the hope that it will open its doors and end their loneliness despair, by bestowing comfort and support which bitter adversity has taken away. The Board of Managers desire to present to the generous public this need in our community, and ask help in forming and maintaining an Old Ladies' Home, as a branch of this Institution, and under its immediate charge.
	"As the ages of our inmates vary from two years old to ninety years, and we are receiving from all classes and denominations, it is manifest that we need not change our system of admissions and management. The same causes that bring to us our children, have made our aged applicants as helpless and dependent as our little children. All we need is a larger building and a greater income. At the time of the erection of the Ladies' Home, only one wing was completed, the main building having been put up later. It is our design to add the south wing, as soon as possible, with the view of making it a department of our Institution devoted to an Old Ladies' Home
	"We, the Managers of the Ladies' Home, are yearly beggers from the Public. We have no fund to draw upon. We have no money in the bank. Today we have only $43.92 in the treasury. A bequest received this year was used to pay a debt. Except the gift from the State, and a very small ground-rent, we have nothing of assured income to depend upon. Our prayer is, 'Give us this day our daily bread.'
	"Californians are not a niggardly type of humanity. The rich have large hearts—we have tested them. And those who possess less, give with equal liberality, the difference being not in the disposition, but the ability. When the story of misfortune is told, they open their purses and help us. They have done so for twenty years. Not for a ingle year has the fountain of their benevolence run dry. And surely it will not fail us in this year of plenty, when the granaries are full, and the gold of the mines abounds, and proves more abundant the deeper the miners go.
	"Three years since, we made an urgent appeal to the farmers for wheat garden vegetables for children's table, and hay for our cows. But the season was not propitious, and but a limited response was made. On This Anniversary we would renew our appeal, and earnestly beg the farmers to send to the Ladies' Home, corner of Post and Franklin Streets, any portion which they can spare of the bounties with which Providence has blessed them during this fruitful year. It will gladden many hearts, and like every good action, will bring its reward in this world or the next.
	"We cordially invite the citizens of San Francisco to visit our Home. Spare a few hours to the children, ye men of business enterprise and wisdom. Come and visit us, ye women of thoughtful, practical minds, of whom many are crowned with leisure and afluence, and judge if we are administering well the trust committed to us. Look at the boys and girls, and encourage them with an approving smile, if they meet your just expectations. Perhaps some little face that turns to you an earnest inquiring look, may linger in your memory, and plead for itself, when a door opens by which you may do it good, and thus many a girl may find a home where she will be useful and loved, and many a boy begin a respectable career. Give your moral support, and supply to them the incentive of pleasing those who are watching them with interest.
	"Remember, but few parents ever come to visit these children, and of those who do come, many are too ignorant or demoralized to have a thought for anything higher than the food and shelter furnished them. Before these forsaken ones life is a great wilderness, through which they have no faithful parents to act as natural guides, and what we want is the means to support them while they are too young to undertake the journey alone, and to equip them for it, when they are ready to go."


## Chapter Three ~ "Distribute Your Gold..." ~ 1875-1889

Words like Mrs. Barstow's did not fall on deaf ears. The annual report for 1875 is full of acknowledgments of gifts. Most gratifying and unexpected was the legacy received from the James Lick Estate recorded on September 21, 1875. This pioneer, who had arrived in San Francisco in 1848, had made a fortune in real estate, all of which he returned to the land of his adoption in aid to various philanthropies. His interest in the San Francisco Ladies' Protection and Relief Society was traceable to a member of the first Board of Trustees of the trust fund Lick established when his fortune first became sizeable. Thomas H. Selby, son-in-law of Mrs. Reese, one of the founders of the Society, was himself an annual member and his wife a life member. Although he later quarreled with the eccentric and quick-tempered Mr. Lick, he had evidently implanted his enthusiasm for this project firmly in that gentleman's mind before he was asked to resign from the Lick Fund Trusteeship. In 1870 and '71 an annual gift of $500 from the foundation was listed. Now, in 1875, Item 6 on the list of Lick bequest read:

	"To pay to the trustees of the Ladies' Protection and Relief Society of San Francisco, for the use of the Society, the sum of Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000) in like gold."
San Francisco churches shared their collections. From the Church of the Advent there was $445; St. John's Presbyterian, $340; Unitarian, $156.30, and from the Ingersoll Lecture, $147.40.
Mary S. Jackson, the new secretary, expressed gratitude to the many givers, adding, "It is true, we have always the poor among us. However, it is also true in this favored land, we have always the rich; and by the compensating balance of Providence directing the affairs of men through an enlightened public opinion, institutions of benevolence are founded where the children of the unfortunate or dissolute find, what they perhaps have never known before, a comfortable home.'
Then she makes a practical appeal to the Legislature, which "under the influence of an enlightened and Christian policy, assists worthy charities throughout the State that care for the friendless and destitute. How much cheaper and better, how much more in accord with the enlightened philanthropy of the nineteenth century, for the State Government to protect and educate for usefulness the unfortunate child thrown upon charity, rather than by neglect, permitting it to fall among the dissolute and criminal, to be dealt with in our courts; ultimately to fill up our prisons, and become a burden to the State.
	"When a boy has arrived at the age of eleven or twelve years, it is the desire of the Managers to place him out, where he may acquire the knowledge that is to fit him for after-life. As an illustration of what may be done, one gentleman, interested in the fortunes of the boys, has, the last year, found places for three—one in a jewelry store, learning to manu facture jewelry; one is with a hatter, and one in a lawyer's office—all doing well, and giving good satisfaction to their employers. Have not the boys other friends who will do as much for them?"
These women were clever in their approach to the citizens of San Francisco. The Report for 1876 states: "We are very much in need of funds to enlarge and renovate our building. Will not some of our citizens to whom wealth has been given with such a lavish hand, aid us? Do not wait until death comes when you have no further use for gold, but distribute it during life and health and live to see and enjoy the rewards which flow from the performance of generous acts and noble deeds. "
The use of the word "gold" instead of money is interesting. Most of the citizens of that period had made money in the gold mines or owned stock in them. Gold was coined in small denominations, and used as currency. Paper money and copper cents, even nickels, were scarcely known in California in the seventies.
The '70's were a period of lavish building in the city. The Board continued to appeal to their affluent fellow citizens. "We are in the midst of a wealthy, growing part of San FranCisco. As you beautify your own homes around us, give something to add to the comfort and appearance of ours. The Home which is situated between Post and Geary Streets is open for visitors on all days except Saturdays and Sundays. We extend to you a most cordial invitation to visit the institution; encourage and stimulate our children by an occasional visit to the school room, ye men of enterprise and business, ye women to whom God has given an abundance, with whom time often drags heavily, see if you cannot find there something to do for God and humanity. And doing it, help lift this world nearer to Him. Cheer the lives of our little ones and bring satisfaction and blessing to your own heart."
The 25th anniversary in 1879 found the Managers still unable to complete the larger building. Once again they reminded the public that their institution was the only organization where "all are received irrespective of nationality or creed; and the municipal authorities, well aware of this, unhesitatingly send to the Home the unclaimed children abandoned upon door-steps and curb-stones, confident that they will be kindly received and tenderly cared for. Yet the maintenance of these unlucky little ones is a severe drain upon our resources, for we have never received a dollar in their behalf from the City Treasury; those to whom we have applied, say always that there is no fund from which they have a right to draw for the support of these innocent poor. If a boy is old enough to commit a petty crime, he can be cared for at public expense in the Industrial School, and a wayward girl may be protected in the Magdalen Asylum; but our 'City Fathers' have not yet solved the problem of providing support for deserted innocent childhood.
	"The Managers desire to express their grateful thanks to Mr. S. C. Harding for his annual effort in collecting donations for the Home. We hope his yearly call upon the public has been accepted by him as one of the duties of his life, so completely has it become a necessity for the institution he so kindly and so indefatigably assists.
	"We feel ourselves forced, as never before, to turn beseechingly to those who have never allowed our appeals to remain unanswered; and we ask, shall this charity, in your midst, which we have struggled for so faithfully, be permitted to fail now, when its offices are more than ever necessary in our fast-growing city? Now, after years of trial have proved its worth and usefulness? VVhen it has been tried in the balance of time, and found not wanting? Shall it be said that in this land of wealth, of large-hearted, free-handed men, this institution, which has rescued so many from utter want and its attendant crimes, was suffered to perish because of a lack of funds to carry on its work?
	"For the past two years, as the Treasurer's reports show, we have been obliged to fall back, for current expenses, upon the fund (consisting of bequests made to us from time to time), which we had set apart as a Building Fund, to complete the main building and add the other wing; our embarrassments having been increased—temporarily, at all events —by the change from a specific amount which has been made in the State appropriation for 1878 and 1879; and that fund (our sole reliance for being able to increase our usefulness as the growth of population increases the necessity for it), is now seriously diminished. Therefore, in this emergency, we appeal to the public; and we implore the rich men, of whom there are very many in our city, to think, in the midst of their prosperity, of these little ones, motherless, fatherless, deserted; left to grow up in sin and crime, but for the sheltering protection of this charity; and we ask them to give of their abundance to these helpless ones, and the blessing which waits upon every good action, will surely crown the deed."
This appeal was signed by Mrs. M. M. Soule, Recording Secretary.
Progress brought new problems. The next year the observant secretary voiced another appeal.
	"It was long the proud boast of this lusty young city of ours," she wrote, "that within her limits were to be found none of the abject suffering, fearful want, privation and degradation, that is the portion of other great cities, whose growth has not been so anomalous as that of San Francisco; but the glorious, free-handed days of our infancy are over forever.
	"We are no longer a contented, hopeful, self-satisfied community, separated from the rest of the world by the interval of a month or a fortnight. We stretch out on all sides our arms, numerous as those of Briareus, and touch each hour the civilization of every land. We have eaten of the fruit of the tree of knowledge, and our paradise of plenty, our Arcadia—a provincial one, undoubtedly, but still an Arcadia, as we look back upon it from these troublous times—has passed away beyond recall.
	"We have the offspring of crime with us, idleness, intemperance and debauchery. Our country is now easy of access, and the worthless, the vicious, as well as the poor and unfortunate of other lands, flock into it, only to find here, as elsewhere, he who would eat, must labor; consequently, the doors of our charitable institutions are besieged with applicants for bounty, and their wards filled to overflowing with those from whom it were cruel to withhold assistance, even when it is evident that their condition is due to their own indolence, improvidence, and too often, crime; but within the walls of the Home are little children, children who are innocent sufferers from the wrong done by others; upon whose heads the sins of the fathers are heavily visited.
	"Ours is the task to rescue these little stranded voyagers from the dark and hopeless future opening before them; to give them good moral instruction; to make their lives clean and pleasant in a well ordered home, where their habits are carefully disciplined, and they are taught to respect and practice those virtues which are the only source of happiness and success.
	"We ask the thoughtful men of affairs, if it is not better that these neglected ones should yield to this training, than that they should grow up lawless and idle, a charge upon the State and a moral blight upon the community; but our work is not entirely caring for the children of the depraved; the joy and hope of many a fond mother's heart comes into the shelter of our protecting Home. Agonizing as it must be for a mother to yield her children to the ministration of strangers, there are numerous women abandoned by their husbands, left without means, and compelled to earn a precarious support, who hail with thankfulness the opportunity of placing their children where they will be well cared for, kept happy, and reared in uprightness.
	"Sometimes, the case is reversed, and it is the father who, in grief and despair, seeks this protection for his children; perchance death has deprived the little ones of the parent whose abounding love and tenderness can illy be counterfeited; or, may be, the woman, monstrous in her unnaturalness, has deserted those whom her chief delight should have been to cherish, and but for this and kindred institutions, the fate of these succored ones would be terrible to contemplate.
	"It is needless to speak at length of other small specimens of humanity— waifs, indeed—abandoned by both parents, who find their way into this asylum, grow up ignorant of the gloomy beginnings of their lives, and are, in time, transferred to homes where kindness, justice, and even tenderness, await them, and a useful, happy career spreads out before them.
	"These are some of our acts of usefulness, of benevolence; this is the work in which we are engaged; it is this which we desire to continue and extend, but without material support this is impossible. Our funds are low, our expenses ever increasing, as must be in the nature of things. Our aid from the State, being confined to a provision for those of the children who have no parents, or only one, is wholly insufficient for all our needs, and, although our benefactions are hv no means obscure, we are rarely—as compared with so-called Orphan Asylums—recipients of bequests and donations from the dying or the wealthy.
	"Some generous spirits there are, that never fail to remember our Society in substantial gifts, but they, alas, are not numerous; and while we are grateful for the kindness, we deplore the inadequacy of such means to meet our demands. Doubtless, there are among us those who, if they understood the workings of this charity, would be glad to give us from their abundance. There are many men of princely wealth in our midst, who could place this Institution beyond embarrassment, without the slightest self-denial; to them, and to all generous people of large fortunes, whose hearts can be touched by the tale of infant sorrow, we appeal, and we beg them to consider the resulting misfortune, if such a charity as this is curtailed in its usefulness. While we recognize the numerous demands which are made daily upon the generosity of our rich men, vve implore them before they turn aside and leave our cry unanswered to recall the words spoken so long ago by one whose heart was ever open to suffering and grief and loneliness and sorrow.
	"Whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold water, he shall in no wise lose his reward."
Financial help came from an unexpected source when the Society was invited to participate, with several other charitable institutions, in an Authors' Carnival to be held in the Mechanics Pavilion during October. At first some members of the Board were decidedly opposed to the venture, but in the end all agreed to lend their best efforts toward its success, with the result that a check for $3,000 was received at the December meeting as their share of the proceeds.
On March 25, 1880, the State Legislature passed an Act appropriating money to support orphans, half-orphans and abandoned children. This relieved the Managers of one phase of their worry, for they would now be assured of a steady income for living expenses. But the problem of completing the building was still acute. The new law specified that no money appropriated by the State could be used for improvements or erection of new buildings.
In that year when State funds became available for running expenses the Society lost one of its most devoted friends, Samuel Harding. His self-imposed obligation of soliciting the necessities of life from his merchant associates had carried the Home through all of its hardest years. Now the Managers passed a resolution acknowledging twelve years of unselfish devotion "that deeds like his should not be lost in the abyss of the past."
As thirty years of service drew to a close in 1884 the Managers found themselves with 212 children in the Home, seven more than the accommodations provided for. The names in the roll-book reflect the cosmopolitan character of the city they served. There were 78 American, 29 German, 29 Irish, 18 English, 9 Spanish, 7 French, 7 Swedish, 5 Scots, 4 German-Americans, 2 English-Americans, 3 Alaska-English, I Chinese-English, I Mexican, I Italian and 2 Irish-Germans.
The Home school was progressing and now had a kindergarten, its benefits described in the report thus: "twenty-five or thirty nursery children, while being entertained, are trained to think or taught much from books, unconsciously receiving lessons in morals, manners, obedience, precision, order, punctuality and neatness."
In 1885, the Board was faced with the problem of how to deal with the owners of houses built on the Van Ness side of their property. The owners' lease on the ground expired that year and there was talk of accepting an offer of $160,000 for the entire block. A committee investigated other possible sites for the Home, but in response to a letter from Mr. H. L. Dodge urging them not to sell the property which would undoubtedly become much more valuable, the Board finally purchased the houses from their owners for $105,000 and began to receive rents on March l, 1887.
The city was moving out around the Home. That they were no longer "in the country" was attested by the decision to give up keeping cows and purchase milk for the children.
The death on January 20, 1887, of the beloved President, Mrs. Nathaniel Gray, brought to a close thirty years of inestimable service. Resolutions passed on February 1 credited her with laying the foundation for all that was best and enduring in the Society. The Manager's Room, refurnished with the $1,500 bequest from her estate, became a lasting memorial to the one who had presided over so many problem-fraught meetings there, and the children's beds were replaced, with the cooperation of her son, Mr. Giles Gray, with substantial iron cots covered with comfortable mattresses.
The following year Mrs. James Robinson, daughter of Mr. Hawes, became a member of the Board; and Miss Kate Hutchinson, whose mother had been a member of the Society prior to 1858, was elected Treasurer, a position she held for over thirty years. Actually, the Hutchinson family have served almost continuously since the early days of the Society. The father was a trustee and secretary of that body for a generation, the older sister, Lizzie, Secretary-Treasurer for a decade, the brother, Joseph, attorney for twenty-five years, his place being taken by the younger brother, James, after Joseph's death in 1910 and held by him until the present.
Mrs. Robinson introduced a unique method of securing contributions for the work of the Home by installing collection boxes on all steamers making port in San Francisco. When the Rio de Janeiro was wrecked just inside the Golden
Gate on February 22, 1901, one of these boxes was found on a piece of wood floating near Alcatraz Island. It is now fastened on the wall between the entrance doors of the present Home at 3400 Laguna Street. In the old days coins from all over the world were apt to be found when these boxes were emptied. Sometimes the sale of these to collectors added materially to the revenue.
In spite of their ever present necessity of raising money the report for April 3, 1888, records that the Society turned down an offer from Charles Dickens to give readings for the joint benefit of the Children's Hospital, The Ladies' Protection and Relief Society and himself! The Committee for Public Entertainment had reported that on the terms proposed there probably would not be enough money made to justify the effort. The terms offered were not recorded.
At a special meeting on January 24, 1888, the Managers voted to sell at auction or cut into lots the property owned by them on Fulton Street, the Trustees to bid it in if it did not bring more than $2,500. It was finally sold for $50,000.
Money raising continued to absorb much time and ingenuity— Miss Kate Hutchinson's report for December 31, 1889, shows some of the sources of income that kept the Society afloat: Entertainment on the Steamer San Blas, $20.50; from the collection boxes on Pacific steamers, $68.80; charity baseball game between the Bohemian and Pacific Union Clubs, $668.00; other sources were legacies, board from inmates of the Home, State appropriations, rents, interest on securities, steamer collections again, $105.60; George W. Cable readings, $627.60. Apparently Mr. Cable offered better terms than Charles Dickens!
## Chapter Four ~ "Hold Fast That Which is " ~ 1890-1899
Six members of the Board of Managers still functioning in 1890 had answered to roll call for twenty or more years— a circumstance that led the recorder of that year to remark that even in this changeful community many of its finest women had learned the wisdom of St. Paul's exhortation— "Hold fast that which is good." Yet with all their devotion to the cause that had held them together so long they were still struggling to persuade the opulent leaders of the city to endow the Society sufficiently to enable them to complete the Home.
The question—"Am I my brother's keeper?" was constantly debated in the public press. One editorial appended to the annual report, now signed by Mary E. Dennis, affirmed that modern civilization had answered the question in the affirmative—insisting that "every consideration of ethics demands that the poor must be comfortably housed, at the expense of the taxpayers, if unable to provide proper and comfortable shelter for themselves." The writer waxed eloquent over the picture of the millionaire who stabled his horses in a palace while his fellowman in the next street had no roof over his head, and insisted that the tendency of modern ideas was to either persuade or compel moneyed men to contribute to the cost of housing for the needy—"at least to protect them from the elements."
In the meantime a committee chairmaned by Sara D. Cornwall was concerned with the disposition of land that had been deeded to the Society under an Act of the State Legislature of 1871—2. This property, known as Block 89—Outside Land commenced on the east line of 19th Avenue, 225 feet north of California Street; thence north on 19th 150 feet;
east 240 feet to 18th, south on 18th 150 feet, west 240 feet to the place of beginning.
The committee reported that real estate experts differed as to whether or not this was a good time to buy or sell real estate in this district, its present value being about $30 per front foot, or a total of $9,000 for the lot. The Board was questioning the possibility of a future move to this location and the advisability of purchasing enough adjoining land to insure space when needed.
	"It is thought by many of our practical men who have watched the city's growth," wrote Mrs. Cornwall, "that the slope of country just beyond us will in the future be as desirable a locality for residence as any in San Francisco; that there will be built some of the finest houses."
If the Society, on the other hand, did not intend to use the property for building purposes, then it was suggested that the Legislature be petitioned to allow charities to sell such land as not needed and apply the proceeds to the improvement of other properties necessary to their work. The Society owned another block bounded by McAllister, Fulton, Stanton and Willard Streets. If the Block 89 piece could be sold the committee felt that the proceeds could be applied to a new home on the Fulton-McAllister piece, the property on which the Home then stood could be leased for terms not exceeding ten years and the income gradually increased to meet the larger burdens.
While the legal implications on this situation were studied by attorneys, the work of the Home on Franklin Street continued to grow until one secretary wrote "it seems as if the walls of the old building must be elastic as never before have so many been sheltered under its roof."
Opportunities for recreation and amusement were offered the children from many sources. The boys were invited to Olympic Club athletic performances, to picnics given by the Methodist and the Plymouth Congregational churches; the older girls to lectures at the Channing Society of the Uni-
tarian Church. By courtesy of the Chronicle and Examiner all the children were guests at the Mid-Winter Fair in 1894. The street railroads—the California, Sutter, Ellis and Geary —gave free transportation, as did the proprietors of the Merry-go-round and the Canal Boats at Golden Gate Park. Gradually donations to the work came in large amounts. In 1895, Mrs. Phoebe Hearst sent a check for $5,000, at the request of her late husband, and the Hibernia Bank donated fifty shares in the Valley R. R.,—sold three years later for $5,000.
After a legal battle that went to the State Supreme Court the Society was awarded $11,487.79 as its share in the Pearson Estate in 1896. The income was steadily increasing.
In the Annual Report of January 5, 1896, the receipts were $20,780.59, Disbursements $3,089.87. There were 445 children cared for and the number in the family, including the staff and old ladies, 280. In fact, the Society was feeling so prosperous that hair mattresses were ordered for the children's beds!
At the same meeting, the Treasurer's Report of the Board of Trustees showed receipts for the year, with balance, $47 ,401.46. Disbursements, $29,118.60. Legacies were reported from the estate of Mrs. May, $200; from Mr. C. P. Lolor, $5,000; and from Mr. Elias Hockstadter, $1,000; Mr. James Nickel, at the hands of the Sexton of Grace Episcopal Church, $234; proceeds from concert by Saturday Morning Orchestra through Mrs. C. S. Wright, daughter of Mrs. Nathaniel Gray, $948.20; proceeds from lectures by Max O'Rell, $179.20; donations received, $302.60; Board money from inmates' relatives, $5,231.00; rents, $7,748.75; State, $11,841.26; annual and quarterly membership dues, $426.50; and interest on money in the Savings Union.
After all expenses they had a balance of $1,671.42.
Two clubs, one for boys and the other for girls, continued active. The Boys' Club was presented with a large and handsome flag given by the President, Mrs. Barstow, for whom the club was named. It flew above the door on every festal day. On June 18, 1897, the Alvin Holt Chapter of Sons of the American Revolution presented the club with another flag in a ceremony shared by the Hon. Horace Davis, the Rev. Mr. Rader and boys from the Home, who gave patriotic speeches and songs of their own with the Salutation to the Flag. This gala day closed with rousing cheers for the Flag and the Sons of the Revolution.
The meetings of the Forget-Me-Not Club (the Girls' Club) were held at Miss Anna Beaver's home where they were taught sewing. Their Fair in June netted twenty dollars which they devoted to the Library Fund. During the year they had picnics at Belvedere and the Park, and there were various other pleasures provided by different members of the Board.
The Matron reported a pleasant visit from the State Superintendent of Schools. She told the Board that he compared their school favorably with the public schools of the city and recommended application to the Board of Education to have them made public schools. The books would then be supplied free and the teachers' salaries saved, as was done in Vallejo and Sacramento Homes.
The records do not show that the Board of Education allowed it.
There was a good deal of sickness during the year, measles, and mumps, but no deaths. It had been hoped that a new wing to the Home could be built but a bake oven was more urgent and the wing had to be postponed. However, substantial improvements were made on the corner of Post and Franklin Streets. The old wooden buildings adjoining the laundry were pulled down and a two-story brick building erected. On the lower floor were the coal cellar, milk room, store room, oven, flour bins and a room for cooling bread. On the second floor were five good rooms and bath. Cement pavements were laid on Post and Geary and also in the yard adjoining the new building.
The building of the new wing was begun in September of 1898. With a kindergarten, assembly-room, dormitories and an infirmary, together with changes to be made in the old building, the Home would be modern and up-to-date.
Legacies continued to augment the endowment. $21,514.14 was received from the Fair Estate; from the Quentin Estate over $1,500.00. There was also a legacy from the Estate of Mrs. Charles Goodall of $737.40.
As the old century closed, the report for 1899 depicts improvements made possible through all this help; but, says the cautious record, "we know we have these with a depleted capital, and the realization is forced upon us that the strictest economy is necessary, unless good friends of the Home encourage us with liberal help as they have so often done in the past."
The new wing had not used all the capital. The old building, too, had been renovated—and, writes the secretary, "we may be pardoned the pride which, in a fine part of the city, has led us to put up a modern iron fence, inclosing a new lawn—almost as broad as is our charity—which will give perennial pleasure. Added to all these expenditures has been the purchasing of necessary furnishings, plain and substantial, and the painting of the entire premises.
	"Still, we have not run in debt, All our bills are paid, and we feel that our work of the past year has been a commendable one. The changes have been made with a view to the best good of the inmates. An infirmary has always been needed, and will minimize the danger from epidemics, with the isolation ward and staircase leading to it.
	"Only those who have known the crowded condition of the dormitories this last year, when two hundred eighty women and children were housed here, can realize the comfort of the two new large dormitories. The playrooms, dressing-rooms, and kindergarten in the basement of the new wing, have made room for marked improved changes in the old. And the auditorium—that bright, cheerful, convenient, commodious room, makes it possible for the first time in the history of the Home to bring all the children together comfortably for any entertainment, and commends itself to all.
	"We believe that with this large expenditure of $20,000, the most conservative friends of the Home will say that we have done wisely and well; for without any attempt to follow prevailing styles of architecture, we have looked entirely towards the practical needs of the Institution. Ambition still is unsatisfied. We know that an added expenditure of $8,000 would build for us two fine substantial flats on the vacant lot on the corner of Post Street and Van Ness Avenue, thus assuring us a good income from what is now unproductive real estate. The thought that we must let this opportunity go by, while building is so cheap, makes us strain our eyes to see if there is not another Horace Hawes ready, as our early benefactor, to bid us 'God-speed'.
	"The life of the Home for the past year has been mainly in the sunshine—the shadow has touched us very lightly. Sickness has been almost unknown, and we congratulate ourselves that as yet there has been no opportunity to test the merits of the new infirmary. The entire number under our care this year has been three hundred ninety-eight—of these, four are old ladies, cheerful and contented,—with a minimum of responsibility and a maximum of comfort,—even in the midst of the noisy life of so many children.
	"New problems have been presented by a species of epidemic among the boys of running away, never before known at the Home. Neither strict rules, starvation diet, high fences, a day spent in bed (that worst terror of an active boy's life), nor sterner discipline prevailed to overcome the fever, once started. The expression of one little fellow to another, 'Oh, come along. Never mind if you do get licked', expresses the condition of mind of many of the youngsters during the past year. We have explained it as the result of the close proximity of the camp at the Presidio; the marching of soldiers on Van Ness Avenue to and from the transports; the desire of the average boy to be a mascot, and the friendliness of the soldiers to small boys in general. With the breaking up of camp, the old conditions of Home life are again established, and the truant fever has entirely subsided.
	"There has been an increasing demand for children from the Home, mostly for adoption, and the President has been able to place thirty-two in families. A child is sent into a new home only after careful investiDation of satisfactory references. The policy of the Society has always been to encourage the parents or guardians, as well as the children themselves, in the idea that the Institution is not to afford a permanent home, but is a refuge to tide over an emergency. A child, while with us, will be given the best of care, physically, morally, and religiously, but we believe the parents should feel the responsibility of the care and sustenance of their own children.
	"If the parents shirk this responsibility then the children must be early taught the lesson of independence and the merit of honest self-support. So the children come to us for a short term of years at most, though the mill of poverty and sickness, discouragement and sin, has kept the work ever extending through all these years. Orphans, half orphans, abandoned, poverty-stricken, all come to our door, and rarely has the door been found shut, even when the resources of the Home have been taxed to the utmost. Encouragement comes to us in reports of success achieved in the school-room, the warehouse, the lawyer's office, and on the farm, by those who look back to early training at the Home—success ranging from those who have their own happy domestic circle to those who have fought their country's battles in the Philippines.
	"Our Matron has gone about her year's duties with the same unfailing interest and attention. Her many years of service have not abated one jot, or one tittle, her affection for her charges. She has the same motherly care for all, and many a little one calls for 'Gladery' with more affection than he has ever known for mother. It has been a matter of comment that, with the cares of a housekeeper for a family of two hundred sixteen, she can still find time to study the individual tastes and needs of the children; but we know that she does, even to the question as to which ribbon or tie best suits the child's complexion. She can point to a happy, hearty, smiling set of children, than which no mother could boast finer.
	"Swain's Bakery has always proved a good friend—from 1863, when R. R. Swain, the father, sent liberal supplies of bread, crackers and cakes, to the present time, 1900, when F. A. Swain, the son, still sends the same kindly donations. If the easiest way to a child's heart is through his stomach, what a wealth of affection can our good friends of the past and present—the Swains—claim from the children.
	"Free transportation has been given to the inmates of the Home by the Geary, California, Sacramento, and Sutter Street Railway Companies. We have a soft spot in our hearts for Mr. Murphy, of the Children's Playground at Golden Gate Park, for giving the children free rides on the merry-go-round on various occasions, as well as giving them glasses of fresh milk. It has been a kindly thing and we greatly appreciate it. Our evening journal, The Post, furnishes a free copy, which is gratefully received.
	"To celebrate properly the completion of the new wing, cards were issued for a reception on November 25th. All the Managers cooperated heartily to make the affair a success, and many friends came to enjoy the new Home with us on that day. Attractive decorations, dainty refreshment tables, tasteful souvenir leaflets, all lent their charm — but none greater than that of our children, dressed in their Sunday best, vying with each other in courtesies to the guests, showing them through the various rooms, or seeing that they were properly served with refreshments. On this occasion, Mr. John McLaren, of Golden Gate Park, sent many potted palms, also greens for decorating, and Mr. Charles Wheeler loaned all the dishes necessary. Thus we prove friends through many kindnesses.
	"So closes an important year in the history of the Society —a year of prayerful, earnest work—a year bright through the fulfillment of a long desire, which has thus opened up a broader field for labor. We recognize the Hand that has led us in our efforts for His service—the Hand that has kept us together, an unbroken band of Managers and Trustees, sparing us for larger work, together with Him, in the year to come. '
## Chapter Five ~ "To do the Right...and to Trusten..." ~ 1900-1905

Miss Kate Hutchinson begins her annual report of December 31, 1900, with a quotation from George Eliot in her story of a poor man caring for an outcast child: "He says, "Eh there's trouble i' this world and there's things as we can niver make the rights on. And all as we've got to do is to trusten, Master Marner, to do the right thing as fur as we know and to trusten. For if us as knows so little can see a bit of good and rights, we may be sure, as there's a good and a rights, bigger nor what we know.'

	"This might well be quoted," says Miss Hutchinson, "as the feeling and faith of those who through the long years since first the Home was established, planned and labored and prayed for 'Truly, there's trouble i' this world and things we cannot make the rights on', when we know that in this one Institution during the past year three hundred ninety children have come to call this place their home; three hundred ninety who have been cheated of their right to be with father and mother at their own fireside; three hundred ninety who have been separated by death or sorrow or sin from those to whom they had the right to look for the deepest interest and tenderest affection.

	"In a short review of the year's work it will be shown that with this great responsibility we as Managers and Trustees have done 'the right thing as far as we have known."

As the Annual Meeting of December 31, 1901 ended the first year of the new century, it also marked the forty-eighth anniversary of the Society's existence. The first paragraph of Mrs. Soule's report indicates the gradual change in the outlook of the Board of Managers. They were becoming modern and leaving behind them the picturesque mid-Victorian approach with its hoop-skirts and poke bonnets. But as far as attaining their goal, the Victorians were just as practical as the modern woman, and worked very much harder.

To quote: "The little band of praying women, as our President has called them, sowed in 1853 seed that still shoots, after rainless years, bearing bright leaves. In these forty-eight years, charity has become less sentimental and more reflective. We are more scientific in method without being, I hope and believe, less sympathetic with individual suffering and individual joy. Our belief in the germ theory and sanitary science may be entirely compatible with the truest charity.'

Mid-year, 1902, brought sorrow to the Home again in the death of Mrs. George Barstow, who had served as President for fourteen busy years. Mrs. Henry Deering, then Secretary, expressed with perceptive understanding the feelings of all who had served with her when she wrote:

	"The regular meeting of the Managers on June 3d, over which Mrs. Barstow presided with her customary ease and tact, is one we shall long remember, because, although we had no knowledge of it then, it was for most of us the last time we were to look upon her dearly-beloved face or to hear her gentle voice. Three days later, her long life of usefulness in the Master's service was ended, for He literally 'gave His beloved sleep.'

	"The benediction of her presence, the wise counsel of one who could speak from the experience of many years, the always kind construction placed upon the words and deeds of others, the broad heart-culture of one emptied of self, set in motion influences which will never end, but go on and on in ever-widening circles, enveloping and encompassing many with whom she never came in personal contact.

	"Her direct influence was always for God and the Right. Many a youth about to step out from the shelter of this Home into the maelstrom of life's battle has felt the kindly grasp of that hand and the loving beat of that heart which never failed to reply to a cry for help or encouragement. We may never know how many of these children have been individually the burden of her prayers, but we do know that this Institution lay close to a heart that was ever open toward the Lord.

	"Though she bore the arduous duties of President for fourteen of the thirty-seven years in which she was a member of this Society, we must not forget that this was but one of several lines of work in which she was engaged, and, that she was as effcient, faithful, and well-beloved in the others as in this, was evidenced by the beautiful and touching tributes offered at the memorial services held at the Presbyterian Mission. Can we enshrine her memory in a way more fitting than by an attempt to reunite the broken strands of her usefulness, so that those who have been leaning upon her for sympathy and counsel may yet find hands outstretched to help them?

	"Mrs. Barstow realized that the most critical time in a child's life was apt to come after he had left the Home, and so she relinquished her hold upon him gradually. Would that there were time today to relate fully of this one whom she encouraged to open a bank account out of his small earnings; of that one who wrote with boyish confidence for a pair of new shoes, as his others had been accidentally ruined and pay-day was yet to come; of another, now grown to strong young manhood, who came 'Home' to her from the Philippines and was made welcome as her own son might be; and of many, many more such circumstances. These are the strands I would have gathered up, for they are really the most important part of work such as ours—the post-graduate course, so to speak.

	"With such an example ever fresh in our memories, let us rouse ourselves from the lethargy of grief to the energetic upbuilding and enlarging of our Institution, the only one of its kind in this great and growing city, so that when we sweep past our fiftieth milestone next July every nerve shall be tense and every effort concentrated in an enthusiastic desire to bring to fuller fruition the work which was so deeply rooted in her heart."

As the new President, Mrs. Dennis, led the organization into its 50th year, she found the spirit unchanged. The Board listened to Mrs. Lucy Dam's history of those years with determination to carry to greater usefulness the unique undertaking so substantially begun.

By 1904 it was possible to sell the Fulton Street property for $50,000, the proceeds of the sale being invested in thirty 5% bonds of the San Francisco, Oakland and San Jose R. R., at $105. The question of using the uninvested portion to purchase a block in the sand dunes south of the Park to be used for the Home when the present site would be too valuable or crowded, was discussed, but no action taken.

The Society also owned property in Napa, deeded to it for the care of Miss Abby Keely during her lifetime. Now that she had died that trust was fulfilled and that property, too, was offered for sale to the Lakeport R. R. Co.—forty acres for $6,000.

## Chapter Six ~ "It was Time to Get..." ~ 1906-1907

A crumbling chimney fell on a small boy's bed on the morning of April 18, 1906; but he was not in it. When the Matron found him in the yard, she asked how he happened to escape.
"When the first brick fell, I thought it was time to get," he answered with childish directness.
Actually, according to Mrs. Deering—s report, the entire family in the Franklin Street Home escaped except "one whose hurt was slight, disabling him but for a few minutes."
But the calamity that struck San Francisco on the gray dawn of that unforgettable morning taxed the couraoe and ingenuity of staff and Managers. Miss McGladery put the experience into vivid words in her report to the Board. It is history that must not be paraphrased.
"Nearly all were quietly sleeping when they were awakened by the falling of plaster and the swaying of the building. I went out into the hall, fearing a panic amongst the children. The night nurse was the only one in hysterics. But people with strong nerves have been known to give way under such terrifying circumstances. The swaying of the building was so awful it seemed as if at any moment we might be entombed.
"Strange to say, all the older children were calm and remained in bed, covering their heads with their blankets.
"The babies, however, didn't fare so well; the tanks had broken loose and the water had drenched them. There they stood with their little bundles of clothes in their arms, calling loudly for Miss Arlett. She was there in an instant and their fears were soon allayed.
"Earthquakes and fires do not prevent children from being hungry. Something to eat had to be furnished. Fortunately plenty of bread was on hand and the morning milk had been delivered. Those children ate just as heartily as if the even tenor of their lives had not been rippled. I noticed, though, they didn't stay in the dining room any longer than was absolutely necessary.
"Mr. Hutchinson was the first to reach the Home. Very soon parents and friends began to come to see if their little ones were safe. Many begged me to let them take their children, so that if all must perish, they might go together. Only those who have gone through such ordeals can realize the quivering of nerves in striving to appear calm and attempting to allay the fears of those so badly frightened as to have lost all self control. Believing the Home was unsafe, I acceded to their request, appreciating that every one removed was one less to care for.
"The day was spent in the lower part of the yard. By evening the fires had spread so rapidly it looked as if we would have to move before morning. Nevertheless mattresses were thrown out and the children were put to bed. The grown folks were up and down all night, watching the progress of the fire. The children were awakened and hastily but warmly dressed and given their breakfasts. Each was given a blanket to carry. We still lingered, however, though keeping a close watch on the fire, hoping some of the Managers might be able to reach us. At half-past ten we were ordered out by the authorities, as dynamiting was to be done on Van Ness Avenue. Where should we go with one hundred forty-five children for shelter? Just here the providence of God was shown. I was making for the Park when a soldier, assigned to duty in that neighborhood, said, 'Take your children to the Presidio; you will be better cared for there.' So to the Presidio we started.
"On our way out a gentleman gave us a large box of crackers. The children sat down by the wayside to eat this lunch and some ladies supplied them with good, pure water. Another gentleman offered me the use of four flats for the children. He was rather staggered when I asked him if he could feed them. Wishing to do something he asked whether I would like a cup of coffee and something to eat. 'Yes, if you will supply the ladies with me,'—'l shall be glad to be of service,' was his reply. He made a fire on the road and we did enjoy the lunch.
"VVe reached the Presidio in the afternoon, footsore and weary. Many of the little ones had to be carried. We had intended to camp inside the gate, but an officer suggested that we would be nearer supplies and the children would be better cared for in the grove in front of the General Hospital. Our Heavenly Father was still looking out for us. Never at any time through the confusion of those first days was our family unprovided for. I left Misses Jansen, Pillar and Jenkins to look after the old ladies. Mrs. Flint and Mrs. Dean would not leave the building. Misses Pillar and Jansen took Mrs. Coburn and Mrs. Cox, turn about, in a clothes basket, making for the Presidio. Someone took pity on Mrs. Cox and sent her to Mt. Zion Hospital for the night. It was after ten o'clock before the Misses Pillar and Jansen reached the Presidio with Mrs. Coburn. A few days later Mrs. Cox and Mrs. Coburn went to Dr. Brown's Hospital.
"Mrs. McCann was left at the Home to look after Mrs. Flint and Mrs. Dean. Mrs. Flint went to one of her friends. Mrs. Dean consenting, was brought out by Mrs. McCann, joining us at the Presidio.
"Here I must speak of the thoughtfulness of Mr. Garrignes, father of three of the children. He brought his team to the Home to see what he could do to help us. Mrs. McCann suggested carrying a load of blankets and Mrs. Dean. This was done and we were made comfortable.
"The babies were housed the first night in tents and by the second night all the small children were under cover. By the third night all were housed, fortunately, for the rain commenced on Sunday evening. Being on the slope, the
ground soon became damp and also the blankets. The tents had to be moved, but the children were kept under cover. Notwithstanding all these trials, not one became sick.
"How glad we all were when our Managers were able to reach us, to stand at the helm to direct our future, relieving us of the responsibilities which we had assumed!
"On Monday morning in the midst of the rain some ladies from Dixon offered to take our babies. The offer, you know, was accepted. Miss Arlett, Mrs. Edsell, the mother of two of the babies, and Hattie Hope went with them. Their reception was of the kindest and their care of the best.
"In the meantime Mrs. Dennis had found a temporary home in Alameda for us. Her son, Dr. Dennis, had secured the use of a government boat and saw us safely to Alameda.
"Our family had now diminished to eighty-five children, the babies having gone and many others having been removed by friends who could give them a temporary home. We were very happy and Mrs. Dennis was looking closely after our comfort. The children really felt they were on a grand picnic—no school, Church or Sunday-School to break into their play.
"But sickness soon began to appear, probably due to our cramped quarters, lack of proper ventilation, and bad sewerage. Sixteen children and one woman came down with typhoid. The sanitariums proved so expensive that Mrs. Dennis and the doctors agreed to take the sick to the County Hospital. The best of care was given them. One little girl, Jennie Ijub, died.
"Twenty-five girls under the care of Miss Pillar and Mrs. McCann went to Los Gatos. Two of the children were very seriously ill out there. Eighteen boys went to San Anselmo.
"All this while the Managers were looking for a home large enough to shelter the whole family. Hopkins Academy was secured, alterations and improvements made to insure our comfort. By the end of June all were again under one roof. I had hoped that in our new home with its large and pleasant grounds sickness would be unknown. But no, typhoid again appeared and diphtheria, that dread scourge, came and removed Iona Davis.
'Here let me pay a tribute to all my associates connected with the care of the children. Not one of them left her post during that trying time, nor shirked any of the added and unlooked for duties."
It was November when this report was given. The Matron continued: "At present we number only ninety-six, no new children having been admitted since we left the city. I am glad to say none are now seriously ill. We may expect to have colds, as the house is not heated. I would suggest that gas drums be provided for the dining room and a small gas stove for the sewing room.
"Before our next meeting Thanksgiving Day will have passed. We, as a family, have much to be grateful for. The Lord has cared for us. The children are looking forward as usual and the refrain, 'Thanksgiving Day, the turkeys ran away, and we will ask for a holiday' rings through the house. There is no doubt in their minds but that the runaway turkeys will turn up at 411 Thirty-fourth Street. They won't get any further.
In the intervening months kind friends had helped from many quarters.
The regular monthly meeting of the Board was held on May l, 1906, just thirteen days after the earthquake. But the Board of Managers met at the Century Club nearby, as the Home was in a state of wreckage and disorder. The treasurer had not been able to make up her books, but reported having on hand $2,494.95 in the San Francisco Savings Union. The Bank of California received $368.35 from relatives of the children at the Home, and $3.00 for the sale of bread which the Matron sold on her way to the Presidio. Of the cash received, $115.00 had been expended. Mr. Hutchinson, who was present, reported that the laundry was not injured except for the chimney. Mrs. Dennis suggested moving the children to Hayward, but the Board did not think the moral atmosphere of the place suitable. Mrs. Charles Willard offered to take forty or more to Belmont under most desirable conditions and it was decided to accept her most courteous offer. Mrs. Willard was the daughter of Mr. Reid, who had the well-known school for boys at Belmont.
Dr. Emma Willits, physician for the Home, reported that friends in Los Gatos, particularly Dr. Yelland, were willing to take one hundred fifty children; and it was decided to send a number of the larger girls there. Capt. Jordan, Building Inspector, came before the meeting to report that he had examined the main house and found that all the chimneys must be properly repaired; that the iron stair escape section must be tied to the main building walls with strong tension rods and turn buckles. Already there was an application to rent the house at the corner of Post and Van Ness for a furniture store. Miss Beaver made a motion that the children be kept out of town for some time. It was carried. A letter from Miss Arlett, nurse for the babies, was read in which she described the surroundings at Dixon where the babies were sent, and the unceasing kindness of the people there.
Two special meetings followed in quick succession as there were so many important matters to be discussed and acted upon. At the May 8 special meeting, there were already offers to lease the Society's property on Van Ness Avenue: From Ransome E. Beach, $3,100 per month for three years for the entire Van Ness Avenue frontage and $250 for the corner of Post and Van Ness. Baldwin and Howell offered $2,000 per month for the Van Ness Avenue frontage, through W. Easton, $2,100 per month for the same. Mrs. Simms moved that the Van Ness Avenue frontage be leased for three years at the best figure possible and referred to the Trustees.
After such an upheaval, one would expect contagious disease to appear to add to the anxiety of the Managers. There were sixteen cases of measles at Dixon and two at Alameda. They discussed the advisability of buying a summer place
to gather the children together. Morse Place in East Oakland could be had. A committee was appointed to attend to the matter of buying a place and was given full authority to act.
Again a special meeting on May I Ith. A report from Miss Arlette was read that the children at Dixon with measles were under the excellent care of Dr. Hall, there. A report was read from Dr. Fletcher of Alameda, in charge of the Society's six children, that "the Morse Place at Highland Park had a mild climate and good transportation facilities."
An invitation from Dr. Yelland to take twenty-five girls to Los Gatos was accepted with gratitude. Miss Beaver was to write that all necessary expenses were to be paid by the Society. The committee on summer places reported that they had visited the Morse Place and were favorably impressed, but found it too limited and too expensive to adapt.
On May 23, another special meeting was called at the Home building. A letter was read from the Trustees of the Merritt Estate, offering use of an old building at 411 34th Street, Oakland, Hospital Tract. For six months and probably for one year, it was to be free to the Home. Mrs. Dennis estimated that repairs and additions would cost $2,500 to $3,000. The Trustees of the Estate asked that a fence be put up between the Home and the new hospital building in the course of construction. The contract of Mr. Veitch of Oakland was read to construct a new dining room and kitchen and make necessary repairs in the house, which would cost approximately $2,000. The offer of the Merritt Estate was accepted with gratitude, and Mrs. Dennis was empowered to go on at once with the repairs.
At the same meeting a report from Alameda stated that twelve of the children were in the hospital with typhoid and were being well cared for by the City and County, leaving thirty-five in the church gymnasium. The San Anselmo Orphanage offered to take twenty-five boys at $6.25 per month. The offer was accepted.
The Trustees had leased the Van Ness Avenue frontage to gather the children together. Morse Place in East Oakland could be had. A committee was appointed to attend to the matter of buying a place and was given full authority to act.
Again a special meeting on May 11th. A report from Miss Arlette was read that the children at Dixon with measles were under the excellent care of Dr. Hall, there. A report was read from Dr. Fletcher of Alameda, in charge of the Society's six children, that "the Morse Place at Highland Park had a mild climate and good transportation facilities.'
An invitation from Dr. Yelland to take twenty-five girls to Los Gatos was accepted with gratitude. Miss Beaver was to write that all necessary expenses were to be paid by the Society. The committee on summer places reported that they had visited the Morse Place and were favorably impressed, but found it too limited and too expensive to adapt.
On May 23, another special meeting was called at the Home building. A letter was read from the Trustees of the Merritt Estate, offering use of an old building at 411 34th Street, Oakland, Hospital Tract. For six months and probably for one year, it was to be free to the Home. Mrs. Dennis estimated that repairs and additions would cost $2,500 Co $3,000. The Trustees of the Estate asked that a fence be put up between the Home and the new hospital building in the course of construction. The contract of Mr. Veitch of Oakland was read to construct a new dining room and kitchen and make necessary repairs in the house, which would cost approximately $2,000. The offer of the Merritt Estate was accepted with gratitude, and Mrs. Dennis was empowered to go on at once with the repairs.
At the same meeting a report from Alameda stated that twelve of the children were in the hospital with typhoid and were being well cared for by the City and County, leaving thirty-five in the church gymnasium. The San Anselmo Orphanage offered to take twenty-five boys at $6.25 per month. The offer was accepted.
The Trustees had leased the Van Ness Avenue frontage through Baldwin and Howell to Friedland, Goldstein & Co. for two years at $2,500 per month. The same to run 100 feet deep. Mr. Davis stated that $12,500 in improvements would be made on the Van Ness Avenue houses and no allowance to be made at the end of the lease. At a special meeting at the Home on October 16, it was reported that all the children had recovered from their ills and that all were in good health once more.
In March, the Board of Trustees reported that they had been able to get only $11,000 insurance owing to the fact that the Home was surrounded by inflammable structures. Miss Hutchinson in her report called attention to the fact that should fire destroy the buildings on the Society's property, all income from ground leases would cease as the lessees would probably fail.
By April the Home had resumed its various activities. The children had all returned; the Boys' and Girls' Clubs were active again. The kindergarten was busy. One of the old ladies had died and a new one had been admitted to the Home.
In many of the meetings the Auxiliary was mentioned. It consisted of three women not offcially connected with the Home: Mrs. Bean, Miss Lydia Hopkins, and Miss Eloesser, who gave freely of their time in planning entertainment for the children. They ran the two clubs, they bought and received books for the children and kept their library in order.


## Chapter Seven ~ "Overflowing with Kindliness..." ~ 1908-1920

With the family she had nurtured so rnany long years safelv installed once more in the Franklin Street Home, Miss McGladery retired after forty-three years of devoted service. She had come to the Society as Assistant Matron, 1865, joined as a Life member in 1866, and assumed the full responsibilicy as Matron in 1871.
She had adopted two children, a boy and a girl. Now she had a family with whom to make her home in Berkeley. Her one request, when notified by the Board that she was co be retired on pension was, "If any of the ladies can help me get Leo (he is your child as well as mine) into the Union Iron Works or Geneva Barn Works to learn his trade, it would be a great help to the boy and me."
That promise was given, as several of the Managers had connections with these corporations, and "Gladery" passed on her duties to Miss Edith Wallbridge from the Gilbert A. Robertson Home in New York State. Miss Wallbridge's term and that of her successor, Miss Harriet Hall, were short. In 1912 Miss Ida V. Graham, who had been assistant to Miss McGladery, began her long years of service.
That year, too, the Board lost the President whose breadth of wisdom, depth of sympathy and long devotion to the Institution had made Mrs. Mary E. Dennis loved by all.
Her successor, Miss Anna Beaver, had been a member of the Board since 1885. Terms as a recording secretary, treasurer, and vice-president had prepared her for the position of leadership she would now hold until her own death in 1938. A graduate of the first class of Vassar College, Miss Beaver was a native of San Francisco, where her parents had come in 1851 on their honeymoon.
She was full of fun, with a keen sense of humor, and liked people. Those who were privileged to work with her on the Board of Managers found her an inspiration. Broad-minded and impersonal in her point of view, if she disagreed with her Board and then found that she was mistaken, she always acknowledged it with graciousness. Although there were many lively discussions and disagreements she always created a spirit of harmony which contributed to the best interests of the Home.
Miss Beaver's devotion to children was transmitted to her numerous acquaintances in San Francisco cultural circles. Soon new volunteers were bringing their talents to contribute to the developing program of the Home. Mrs. Oscar Cushing came to teach singing once a week, the results ringing in the joy of Christmas carols sung as never before. The holidays brought money, gifts and numerous invitations to share in celebrations, both public and in private homes. $250 came from the estate of Daniel Nfyer. Mr. Henry Miller sent a hundred dollar check, with the hope that it could bring comfort to the elderly ladies. Attractive furniture for their rooms and a wheel chair, which enabled one of thern to enjoy the upper porch with its flower boxes, were thus made possible.
The Sunday Schools of the city opened their doors to these children, the older girls being allowed to go unattended to Calvary Presbyterian, the big graystone church on the hilltop at Fillmore and Jackson, completed just before the fire of IC06, which had swept through its former site on Union Square. Older boys participated in the affairs of Trinity Episcopal Sunday School and a group of younger children were welcomed at the neighboring Unitarian Church.
Patriotism was encouraged when a dozen children from the Home were given seats at the church service President Taft attended at the First Unitarian Church. The rest of the household stood on the steps of the Home, vigorously waving flags as the Nation's Executive drove by, smilingly acknowledging the greeting. The Home was festive for the event, their old silk flag waving at the entrance, and a new one the gift of Mr. Hutchinson, unfurled to the breeze above.
Saturdays were busy in the Home, with volunteer teachers Miss Davenport and Mrs. Avenali instructing the girls in sewing at their club meetings and the Misses Eloesser and Hopkins keeping the Library open, advising the youngsters the selection and care of books.
Cooking lessons were pleasurable in the model kitchen where on alternate weeks the mid-day meal was prepared and served by two different groups. The report said hopefully that "the neat little maids in white caps and aprons may grow up to feel that housekeeping may be made beautiful and that home-making is one of woman's highest privileges."
Gardening and manual training were planned for the boys. but lack of space for the latter made it difficult.
There were no long vacation outings for the children during the summer, but they were taken often to the parks, beach, Presidio, and other points of interest.
A small sum of money was left from the vacation fund. This, with another amount that belonged to the boys as a whole, was put by unanimous vote into a good magic lantern. The silent piano in the old school room, through an inspiration of Miss Beaver, was transformed into a Victor talkingmachine, which made its appearance on the Fourth of July.
There were songs, band selections, and a gay little tune drew children and attendants into a waltz, and they wound up with a Virginia reel. These two modern entertainers are great helps at the little parties given for the older children. Supper and some little surprise always wound up these evenings giving a real family flavor.
When the school year began in August, 1912, about half the children were transferred to the Adams Cosmopolitan School. It was thought wise that at least some of the children should have the advantages of a good building.
Gymnasium classes on Monday afternoons were made more attractive when neat suits of blue serge were substituted for the miscellaneous assortment of gingham dresses previously worn. Because Miss Graham would not neglect the boys they, too, were provided with equally suitable uniforms. General alertness, ready response to orders and more freedom and breadth of work brought satisfactory improvement in all groups.
The Managers were especially gratified as they began to meet their boys and girls in all sorts of useful occupations about the city. In large department stores, grocery stores, hairdressing, millinery and other establishments they were often greeted by those who had grown up in the Home. In offices efficient secretaries and typists attested to the value of the businesslike training these young people had had in their formative years.
In February, 1913 school work in the Home was abandoned and all the children were sent to the Adams Cosmopolitan School.
During that summer, the youngsters from the Home had their first experience of vacation away from the city fog. One of the Directors discovered a ranch in Sonoma County which could be rented for the purpose and Mr. George Newhall, a trustee, footed the bill.
It was a thrilling experience to most of the children. They rode on the ferry boat and train. One little boy, after the three-hour ride asked, "Are we still in the United States?"!
Miss Graham and her assistants had a busy time unpacking and arranging everything for the family of one hundred twelve children. But they were well rewarded in the happiness of the children as they fed the chickens, played with the kittens and the dogs, gathered flowers and waded in the creek. The older ones went swimming and all reveled in the freedom and the sunshine. "Are we going to go back next summer?" begged a chorus as they boarded the train headed back to the city. "I need to go back to the country," insisted one of the little fellows with expectant emphasis.
It was a problem to instill the joy of doing for others into these children, for whom so much was done. MiMrs.ssus Vandenberg, a wise Life Member, proposed that they make gifts for the Indians. little figures worked eagerly under Miss Graham's guidance. When the work bags were finished, the Matron took her girls to the YWCA where they could deliver
their gifts personally and see the variety brought by other groups. The youngsters listened with responsive hearts as the speaker of the evening told about the young descendants of the First Americans on the big reservations. When it was announced that the singer expected for the program had not arrived it was the turn of the girls from the Home to express their public appreciation of Mrs. Cushing's training. Quite willingly they stepped onto the platform, delighting the audience with their spontaneous music.
Early in December death took the one who had done so much to instill the spirit of family life into the Home. Mary McGladery's last days had been spent in the home of her adopted daughter, Miss Laura Frank in Piedmont. As Dr. Palmer of the Plymouth Foundation spoke of the long years when Miss McGladery had been a tower of strength to her associates and a source of inspiration to all who had looked to her for counsel and friendship the room was filled with voung people and Board members. Even in retirement she had listened to and guided the many who had come for visits of gratitude. The home which had been haven to her in the evening of life seemed to overflow with kindliness given and received.
More and more the children were allowed to feel themselves a part of the community life. When San Francisco was host to the world during the Expositon of 1915, friends and Board members made it possible for many the children to take advantage of the opportunities of those months. In April, thirty of them were guests of Mrs. Thurston of the Board of Managers at a concert by Mme. Schumann-Heink; in May the whole group had a gala day at the Exposition. Miss
Graham took their picnic supper to the grounds, but allowed the youngsters in groups to have liberty until the lights went out. Her confidence was rewarded, for each one was true to the trust and all returned at the appointed time. In June, Mr. Anagastia of Argentine entertained them lavishly. Then the entire Family departed in June for a summer camp rented by the Society at Sunol.
The following summer, that of 1916, the Society at last owned its permanent summer place—the gift of Mr. Arthur Smith who with his sister, Miss Louise Smith, had given generously to the children in many other ways. At "Happy Land" —thirteen acres of ideal country at Los Gatos—the children had many a summer pleasure, marred only by the scourge of poison oak. Even here there was a kind friend ready with his service. Dr. Gober of Los Gatos cared for the little patients, his only remuneration their grateful thanks.
As their country became embroiled in World War I, the youngsters were made to realize that there were children less fortunate. Their unit—the Franklin Street Red Cross Auxiliary—started work in 1917. A 1918 Report gives the children of the Home credit for contributing from their savings toward French baby kits. Kindliness showered on these wards of San Francisco philanthropists now overflowed in new channels. Like all Americans, they found themselves a participating force in the world beyond their own shores.


## Chapter Eight ~ "Another Phase of Work..." ~ 1921-1953

In October of 1921 the Board of Managers was faced with a trying decision. State authorities on child care were stressing a new program of foster homes for dependent children. State aid was now diverted to paying for their care in private homes. This meant a steadily decreasing demand for the type of work that had by now almost completely superseded the original purpose of protection of women.
As the city had increased in population, the pressing need now seemed to be that of providing for elderly ladies. An offer came to consolidate the work of the Society with the University Mound Old Ladies Home. Miss Beaver, still more interested in child care, proposed the possibility of uniting with the Protestant Orphanage, an institution that claimed the prestige of the city's first organized charity.
At the Annual Meeting of January 3, 1922, Mr. H. M. A. Miller, Secretary of the Board of Trustees, presented the arguments on both propositions, saying that the men favored amalgamation with the University Mound. The majority of the Managers seemed to agree.
For some time it had seemed inevitable that a change of location for the Home must come, as the Hawes property had now become far too valuable and too close to business for its original use. At this meeting in 1922, there was talk of acquiring property bounded by Francisco, Bay, Laguna and Octavia Streets, but until the future course was settled nothing could be done.
Matters progressed so far that summer that in August a new name—the San Francisco Home for Women and Children—was selected for the proposed consolidated organization. But a month later the Board of Managers came to the conclusion that Mr. Miller had swept them off their feet in his enthusiasm for the amalgamation of the two societies. Feeling that, after all, the work of their own organization had always been unique, the secretary was instructed to write their attorney, Mr. Hutchinson, explaining that it was the consensus of opinon that it would be wiser to continue along their own particular lines than to combine with any other organization. At the same time, a letter of appreciation was sent to Mr. Miller in recognition of the time and effort he had given to the proposal.
By November the Society had arrived definitely at the most important conclusion that a new building should be erected for "the care of elderly women and convalescent women and children. '
That this decision had been made with prayerful and conscientious thought was revealed in the excerpt from the Secretary's report to be incorporated in the minutes of the annual meeting of January 1923:
	"That the period of transition, investigation, and discussion has closed with a unanimous decision as to the change of work and a Board closely united on all fundamental questions, we feel, is largely due to our President, Miss Beaver, subordinating her personal love for work among children to the broader consideration of the needs of the community. With breadth of vision and wide study in all charitable work, she has stood aside to let the Board come to its own conclusions, helping always, giving of her time, strength and knowledge for every need. Thus, we, the Board, go forward into the new year with the utmost confidence in our beloved President and the work yet to be done."
By February the Building Committee was far enough along for its chairman, Miss Foster, to give an account of the work accomplished and present two rough sketches of the proposed new building submitted by the architect, Miss Julia Morgan. Also, at this meeting a motion was made and carried that the annual membership fee be abolished this year and that at the next printing of the constitution and by-laws, the change be made.
Owing to the difficulty with the children in getting a proper caretaker for the boys (as they were so few in number), and with the contemplated change of the work of the Home, it was decided at the March meeting to pass the following resolution:"... that as a fitting opportunity occurs the boys are to be gradually placed in new homes and institutions."
In April, there were thirty children still enrolled at the Home. All of the parents and agencies were notified that the children would have to be placed elsewhere at the end of the school term. The Juvenile Court was looking after its own, while Mrs. Ollcult of the State Board of Control helped to find homes for many of the children.
In February of 1924, another change of policy was expressed in a motion which declared: "It is the sense of this meeting that in our future work we do not limit ourselves in selecting the people for the new Home from this city only."
By March the Building Committee reported that the Trustees had approved the plans for the new building, to cost $150,000. As work on this edifice went forward the public was informed through the press, and the _Chronicle_ published a history of the Society with a plan of its future work.
As the Society would no longer be using Camp Smith at Los Gatos, the YWCA was giwn permission to spend the month of July there.
Work progressed smoothly. On March 3, 1925, the Board of Managers met for the first time in the large living room of the red brick building at 3400 Laguna Street. Miss Beaver spoke appreciatively of the spirit of cooperation which had made the undertaking possible and the treasurer revealed that all this had been accomplished with a balance of over $28,000 left in the bank.
After much thought and study, the Board had concluded that the greatest need of the community could be best met by providing a home for gentlewomen of reduced circumstances resident in the Bay Area. In pursuance of its original intentions there would be no requirement of a lump sum for admission, because that often acts as prohibitive to those most worthy of aid. Since those admitted to this "Family Group" would come presumably for the rest of their lives, the committee on admissions was admonished to exercise the greatest care in selecting women of similar tastes, education and interest in the intent of welding them into a congenial unit.
For its other phase, that of a convalescent home for women and children, the Home was planned with a wing capable of housing twenty-three temporary "guests" at a time. Since the finances of the Society would not warrant a completely free sojourn, a nominal fee of $1.50 per day was stipulated. Convalescents are admitted only through the recommendation of physicians—a service used and appreciated by many of the city's leading doctors. Year after year, during the past quarter of a century, letters of heartfelt appreciation from the women who have come and gone have rewarded the Board members who give unstintingly to this needed service; and through those years, the women who had been recipients were also given opportunity to share.
During World War Il, many of those who were able participated in Red Cross work of many kinds. There was a First Aid Training Course given at the Home. In the upstairs Sunporch, groups daily wound bandages or wrapped hundreds of food packages to be sent to prisoners of war overseas. Miss Georgina Hele Ash, for twenty years Superintendent of the Home, took charge of this work for the Society and in addition, took under her wing many a lonely soldier who enjoyed a cheerful meal in the large dining room and found in her someone who could write an understanding letter to an anxious family in a faraway state.
Now, as the Society is on the threshold of its second hundred years, those who receive its care find that generous-
minded friends of the 20th century are giving thought to their comfort in the same way as the pioneers provided necessities. Every day the May T. Morrison garden house is filled with grateful women enjoying its bright sunroom, filled with cheerful potted plants and ferns.
If any one of the ladies becomes ill or has serious sickness in her family, there is a free bed at Children's Hospital for the exclusive use of the Society. This is the gift of the Misses Edith and Lucy Allyne.
These two civic-minded sisters, descendants of San Francisco pioneers, were also responsible for half of the cost of the flats bought recently on adjoining property on Francisco Street. The Trustees of the Society allotted the remaining amount necessary for this purchase. These flats provided much needed dwelling space for members of the Home staff.
The spirit of this Board of Managers is like that of a real family; in fact, in 1953 three members can trace their personal antecedents to those who worked in the early days. Mrs. Philip Landis' great-great-grandmother was Mrs. A. B. Reese; Mrs. James Towne's grandmother-in-law, Mrs. A. C. Nichols, was another one of those indefatigable twelve who helped raise funds towards the purchase of the first Home; apd Mrs. William Hilbert's father, Mr. Sheldon G. Kellogg, WKS Attorney for the Board.
In the words of a brochure published in 1934, the Society is "keeping faith with its founders of 1853, though in a different form, by giving PROTECTION to women, who after the burden and strain of life need a sense of security and the rest of a permanent Home, and by RELIEF to the minds and bodies of the women and children who come to us to be built up in health and strength in order to face the world anew."

## Appendix

### COPY OF CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION of the San Francisco Ladies' Protection and Relief Society

STATE OF CALIFORNIA

CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO )
Be it known to all whom it may concern, that the 9th day of August, 1854, at a regular meeting of the San Francisco Ladies' Protection and Relief Society, a beneficial Society organized for charitable purposes, the following persons were duly elected and chosen Directors of said Society, to wit:
William H. Dow, William A. Darling, Samuel M. Bowman, J. B. Crockett, and A. B. Eaton, to continue in office until the second Tuesday of July, 1855, and to be called and known by the name of "Directors of the San Francisco Ladies' Protection and Relief Society," and by that name to have perpetual succession, and who shall take charge of the estate and property of said Society, and transact all affairs relative to the temporalities thereof. It is further certified that the undersigned Mary Ann Darling presided over, and the undersigned Kate D. Kellogg acted as Secretary of the meeting of said Society, at which the Directors, aforesaid, were chosen, and were the Judges of said election, in virtue of their offices. And we further certify that the objects and purposes of said Society are to render protection and assistance to sick and dependent women and children, and that the estate or funds of the said Society consists of fourteen hundred and fifty dollars in cash.
To all which we certify in order that the said Society may be incorporated according to law.
In testimony whereof we have hereunto set our hands this 11th day of August, A.D— 1854.
(Signed) MARY ANN DARLING
(Signed) CATHERINE D. KELLOGG
Signed in presence of
G. J. Hubert Saunders
STATE OF CALIFORNIA
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO )
On this fourth day of October, A.D., one thousand eight hundred and fifty-four, before me, G. J. Hubert Saunders, a notary public in and for said county, personally appeared Mary Ann Darling and Catherine D. Kellogg, to me known to be the individuals described in, and who executed the annexed instrument, and acknowledged that they executed the same, freely and voluntarily, for the uses and purposes therein mentioned.
( L.S. )
In witness thereof I have hereunto set my hand and affixed my offcial seal, this day and year, first above written.
(Signed) G. J. HUBERT SAUNDERS, Notary Public
***
Recorded in San Francisco County Records, Liber D, Miscellaneous Records, page 16th, May 28th, 1855.
(Signed) JAMES GRANT,
County Recorder
### RULES AND REGULATIONS
Adopted by the Board of Managers July, 1864
When the Society moved into its new home in 1864 the following Rules and Regulations were adopted. It had become a big institution with many children to take care of.
### HOUSE RULES AND REGULATIONS
The following Rules and Regulations were adopted by the Board of Managers of the Ladies' Protection and Relief Society, in July, 1864:
No visitors shall be admitted on Sunday, either to see matron, teacher, or hired persons; and none stay in the house, except by written permit of one of the Executive Committee.
All unnecessary cooking, or other secular work, to be avoided on Sunday.
All clothing to be prepared on Saturday.
The hours of rising, seven o'clock a.m., Breakfast seven-and-a-half o'clock, in summer; eight o'clock, in winter. Dinner twelve and a-half o'clock. Supper, five o'clock.
The children at meals always to raise the hand, and wait till the matron or teacher is ready to serve them. They shall enter and retire in regular order; also wash their hands and faces after every meal.
The children will go to bed at the hour assigned by the matron.
Every inmate of suffcient age shall, after putting her own clothes in order, appropriate a suitable portion of time to manual labor while she remains and be under the control and direction of the matron. Must at no time leave the house without her permission, until regularly dismissed.
She will be expected to rise and retire at the hours specified; keep her room well arranged; wash the paint once a week; be neat and tidy in dress and person; industrious during working hours, and listen to the advice given by the managers, matron, or visitors.
No inmate must go to the kitchen, except when sent by the matron, and only remain so long as necessary to do the work required.
Friendless or destitute girls under sixteen and over three years of age, and boys under ten and over three years of age, either orphans or abandoned by their parents, may be received and provided for, until pennanent homes in Christian families can be secured by adoption, or otherwise.
Every application in behalf of children should be written, embracing such particulars as may be known of their history, viz.: age, name, birthplace, names of parents, occupation, religion, etc.
A line from some regular physician, certifying the child is in good health is required.
A permit must be obtained of one of the Committee on Admissions.
Visitors admitted every day, except Saturday and Sunday.
Those who are boarded in the house, will pay (first Thursday in the month) the matron.
Guardians of children will be allowed three months trial, at which time the child may be indentured, or returned to the house.
The Board expects in all cases to hear respecting a child's welfare and conduct within six weeks after transfer from the house.
Every person applying for children or adults, must furnish satisfactory references.
In case of adoption or apprenticeship, final action must be referred to the Executive Committee, or subcommittee duly appointed.

### DUTIES OF THE MATRON
She shall see that the house, yards, fences, outhouses, etc., are kept in order; and make an inventory of all stock, tools, and other effects belonging to the institution.
She shall control all the inmates of the house; assign each her duties, and see that she discharges them.
She shall overlook the beds once a week; see that they are changed weekly, well aired, and the mattresses turned daily.
She shall have charge of all groceries and provisions; keep all articles under lock and key, and give out proper quantities to be used; see that the meals are well cooked, decently served, and at proper hours. She shall attend family worship immediately after breakfast; and evening, after supper. Every member of the family must be present, unless unavoidably detained.
When any accident occurs, sickness, or death, she shall give immediate information to the Executive Committee, or through the Visiting Commi'ttee.
She shall be present while the inmates are at their meals; and see that a Blessing is asked.
The matron shall enter the name of every person admitted to the house, the age, and nationality; keep a register of all departures, indentures, the trade, place, and person to whom bound; also, of deaths.
She shall prepare a written rqx—rt monthly for the Board, of all donations of clothing or money; all admissions, dismissions, and any interests of the Institution.
She shall prepare a written list of all supplies needed for the family, and hand to the Purchasing Committee.
The matron shall attend church once on the Sabbath with such of the inmates as she thinks proper, or make an arrangement with the teacher to fulfill this duty occasionally, and consult the Committee on Religious Exercises and be guided by them in all matters pertaining thereto.
She shall not permit the girls bound to the house to attend evening meetings, unless attended by the teacher or herself; and that neither they or the teacher absent themselves from the premises without the knowledge of the matron.
The matron shall see that all fires and lights are extinguished by ten o'clock. She shall be the last up; take a survey of the house and around the premises; when prevented from doing this, she shall assign it to the teacher or some confidential person in the employ of the Board.
She shall, as much as possible, keep such children as are affected with contagious diseases apart from the others; see that the physician's prescriptions are attended to, and either by personal attention or aid from the adults, take care of the sick.
The matron and teacher shall attend to washing the children all over every Saturday afternoon.
She shall provide for the cutting and making of all garments; shall see that each child is provided with a dress or frock to wear while eating or at play; that the girls and smaller boys have check aprons when in school—always a change of each to be kept;
That each child have at least three shirts, and two suits of clothes, and three pairs cf stockings—all marked with their respective numbers; the boys' shirts to be changed twice a week.
She must report to the Executive Committee every instance of continued disobedience of the rules of the house.
### DUTIES OF THE TEACHER
She shall have a general supervison of the children during school hours. Keep a regular list of number in school every day.
School hours, from nine to twelve o'clock, A.M., and from two to four o'clock, P.M.; one hour of which shall be devoted to sewing by the girls; the boys to be usefully employed as she thinks best.
She shall see that the children are up at the hour specified; their clothes put on carefully and neatly; their faces and hands washed, and hair combed ready for school.
On opening school, she shall dictate a text of Scripture, which all shall repeat in concert.
She shall see that the children are furnished with an apron when going to meals or to play; that the school aprons are neatly folded and laid on the desks and resumed on entering school.
The children are never to be allowed to leave the school-room without permission, or attend the call of any one except the matron. Always to raise the right hand when they wish to speak to the teacher, and wait for her attention.
The teacher shall not allow the children to spoil their clothes, books, slates, pencils, paper, etc.
She shall prepare a written list of all books or articles required in school for the School Committee, and apply for advice and direction to them.
She shall see that the children's hands and feet are clean before going to bed, and each child kneel by the bed and repeat a short prayer.
She shall keep the children's clothes neatly mended and repaired, with such assistance as the matron provides.
At meals she shall assist the matron in waiting upon the children. In the absence of the matron, she shall preside and act in her place.
She shall see that the boys' dormitory is kept in good order; the beds made by the persons assigned by the matron.
### STANDING COMMIITEES
Executive Committee-—Consisting of five, whose duty it shall be to attend to whatever concerns the welfare of the inmates, or in any way promote the interests of the Society. All matters of importance to be referred to them.
Admissions and Dismissions Committee—Consisting of six. Every application to be referred to one of said Committee, by whom an order may be given, and by none other, and the applicant received in the Home, subject to the approval of the Board.
Every discharge to be written by one of same committee, and ar proved by at least two of the committee.
School—To take charge of the school, purchase books, etc. All matters pertaining to it to be superintended by said committee.
Religious exercises—Direct as to the observance of the Sabbath, attendance on Church, etc.
Housekeeping and Supplies—All purchases to be made by one of this committee; every bill examined and marked approved, before it is paid.
Locating Children—All applications for indenturing or adoption of children referred to this committee, who shall make inquiries; if satisfactory, report to the Board, and final action be taken; the Secretary will then prepare the Indenture.
Repairs and Furniture—Everything pertaining to this department be attended to, and each bill examined and approved before payment, by one of this committee.
### THE DEATH OF SAMUEL C. HARDING
At a meeting held on December 6, 1880, resolutions expressive of our loss and our sympathy with the bereaved family of S. C. Harding were ordered placed on the records of the Society, as follows:
Resolved: That by the death of Samuel C. Harding the San Francisco Ladies Protection and Relief Society has lost one who testified his friendship for the children under its charge by more than twelve years of voluntary and unpaid service as a most successful solicitor of charity—annually at the winter holiday which comes so early and so bitterly to these childish hearts. And while we recognize with deep reverence and humble gratitude the guiding hand that has led us during these many years, we would at the same time acknowledge our entire dependence upon our kind Heavenly Father for all future good.
G. S. ADAMS,
Recording Secretary
