# August 4, 1853 ~ Mrs Eaton


In 1853, San Francisco consisted of a small settlement of square whitewashed “portable houses” - nestled around a Bay filled with the masts of deserted schooners.

Looking out from the window of one of these makeshift homes on Second Street near Minna, was Mrs A B Eaton. She was startled to see a breathless girl climbing the wooden steps to her house.

Mrs Eaton opened the door and listened while the sobbing stranger poured out her tale.

The girl had arrived that afternoon - after a four months journey around Cape Horn - She expected to ﬁnd her brother on the dock.

But neither he nor any emissary was there. Maybe he was dead, or off in the mines or he had never received the letter she sent saying she was coming.
She had nowhere to stay and no one to turn to for help.

At the dockside, a ship’s acquaintance had directed her to a place nearby.
But the girl took one look at the rouge on the cheeks of the woman who had answered the door.
The girl knew immediately had that this was no place for a lady.

Alone and friendless, she wandered the streets in mounting panic;
The she noticed a woman observing her from the window of her home.

Mrs Eaton’s friendly face in the window gave the girl courage to ask for help.
She asked Mrs Eaton to give her protection until they could trace her brother?

The girl had come to the right place. Mrs Eaton’s husband, a major in the Army - stationed in the Presidio.
He was a member of the Board of Trustees of Howard Presbyterian Church
- built in Happy Valley — between Mission, Market, First and Second Streets.

In this area, with its good spring of water, were the homes of people like the Eatons and
The portable homes had replaced the hundreds of tents pitched in the feverish days of ’49.

It was also the home of their pastor, Dr Samuel Willey. This minister was the founder of a mission school which later developed into the University of California.

Dr Willey listened sympathetically to Mrs. Eaton’s young guest.
He, too, had just befriended a New York girl who had crossed the Isthmus of Panama following a brother.

The brother planned to open a store in San Francisco but had sickened.
He had written home telling of his illness.
His sister, hoping to nurse her brother back to health,
had arrived just in time to see him die.

The minister agreed that attention must be paid to women stranded in this city
- with its gambling dens, saloons and prostitutes.
True, there were by now eighteen churches, two government hospitals, an almshouse, several orphanages and some secret and benevolent societies.
But not one of them provided the care and hospitality envisioned by Mrs Eaton and Dr Willey.

Thus it was that on August 4, 1853 Mrs Eaton gathered a group of representative women of her church, as well as from the First Presbyterian, First Baptist and First Congregational (all founded in 1849). They met with women of Trinity Episcopal in their church on Pine Street between Montgomery and Kearny.

The outgrowth of that meeting was the constitution of the Ladies Protection and Relief Society.
It served with very few changes for over a hundred years. Its object "to render protection and assistance to strangers, to sick and dependent women and children.”

Within a year, the group had decided to open a home for "all respectable women in want of protection, employment in families or as needlewomen.” Founders vowed that they would personally “render protection and assistance” to the “sick and dependent women and children” who came to them for aid.

Over the hundred and seventy year many changes, significant pivots

SFLP faces new new set of challenges in the 21st century.
Will we run out of money or will we once again find a new ways to serve the community?

Fingers crossed: the Society will have the luck, the daring and the wisdom to continue to serve the community for another 170 years.


 ## Frontier Women ~ p218

The San Francisco Ladies Protection and release society, established in 1853, was one such organization.Its inspiration came from Mrs A B Eaton, who opened her cottage door one day to find a young woman asking for assistance. Her brother, the woman said, had planned to meet her at the steamer but had never arrived, leaving her nowhere to stay and no want to turn to for help. Realizing the economic and moral vulnerability of such a woman, Mrs Eaton called together her friends to form a society to “render protection and assistance to strangers, to sick independent women and children." within a year, the group had decided to open a home for "all respectable women in want of protection, employment in families or as needlewomen.” The emphasis on respectability clarified the middle class standards to which potential clients would be held while occupational opportunities provided for them implied their working class origins.

## California Women & Politics

The San Francisco Ladies’ Protection and Relief Society (sflp&rs), another of the city’s oldest charities, was formed to meet the needs of
dependent women. Tradition holds that the sflp&rs began when a young woman came to San Francisco to join her gold-hunting brother. When the brother failed to meet her ship, a fellow passenger directed the girl to a house on Minna Street, but the house proved to be a brothel. Alone and friendless, she wandered the streets in mounting panic until she noticed a woman observing her from the window of her home. Trusting to the solidarity of her sex, the girl ran to the door begging for protection. Her benefactor, the wife of A. B. Eaton, a Presidio officer, promptly called a meeting of local women, and the result was the San Francisco Ladies Protection & Relief Society.

 sflp&rs founders agreed that “almost every arrival from the Atlantic and other parts of the world” brought women who were left “destitute in our city by the decease of their natural protectors on their passage hither.” Founders vowed that they would personally “render protection and assistance” to the “sick and dependent women and children” who
came to them for aid

