# 2023-05-11 Bar Crenn

* Tommy ~ sommelier
* Gabriel ~ DJ ~ ligornia ~ born here ~ summers & soccer in Italy
* Ernesto ~ bussing ~ from El Salvador ~ father in Nashville

## first course

rice cracker (not) thingy with scallop mousse, caviar. old leaf etc etc

Cremant de Loire - a sparkling wine from the Loire Valley ~ is methode champenoise

Gewurz sparkles thing from Vienna ~ reminde my o a Vinho Verde ~ but it was the wim of the tavernas in the Viener Wald


## Second curse

Oyster mousse ~ sublime ~ I could eat oysters this way all night and for desertSecond course


## third course

Tart with things from BlueSky farm in Sonoma

Ordinary in some ways, yet it was a tart tart and special in its own way

Sitting here, talking to one of the most interesting I know - which is me

Living in the moment. With the wine, food, music, staff, the room: It's hard to be coherent. Why even try. Stream of consciousness. Let the good thoughts roll.

Outside the people walk by. Not the travellers - where you entered and left another world. Her I see the parked cars. I can't see a homeless person - though one might walk by. Not your normal three-star very private experience

Nice French lady from the 13th came by to say hello. From the restaurant side? Move to 15th or something.

Their morels just came in. Chef looking at them but no dish yet.


## fourth course

Flat bread with sea urchin ~ ultimate salt and fish roe thingy

## fifth course

Brown waffle with orange marmalade in the crevasses

There are three black people here. look all happy. Makes me think of Osso with all the black people there. And. If Black people like to dress up nice. Maybe they also like to eat up nice.

How can I come back? Gabriel said he would talk.

Gabriel will email me. A La Carte Menu is coming in a month or so. I can come back.

After work: Mona Loa up the street

So, an evening. Worth every penny??? Who is to say? Certainly more exciting than Heritage. OK. but suppose I did this every night. No. Then it would get boring. Rarity is valuable. And plenty of space between me and the next table. David Bowie: "Let's Dance" playing in the background. What more could you ask for?

Time to go.
