# 2023-12-25 Kyle

## Preface

While we were driving from Healdsburg to San Rafael, Kyle, Cynthia and I talked about work

Things Kyle said that stick in my mind:

* Kyle is relatively old for his position
* Kyle is not always happy to go to work
* A lot of personnel changes are likely to happen in the next year
* Both C and K not likely to be organizational superstars in the future - and do not feel a need to be one
* There is something good about being a "professional"

This discussion spurred me to start to write down some of my thoughts about work and life that I have had for a while.

## Concept

I have this idea that there are people who derive their meaning and pleasure in life from something other than what is measured by the normal measures talked about by economists.

It is important to consider this idea in the context of the normal measures of the economy.

<ai helped >The normal measures of the economy are things like GDP, income, wealth, income inequality, etc. And if you are a person that derives your meaning and pleasure in life from something other than what is measured by the normal measures of the economy, then you are not going to be measured by the normal measures of the economy. And this may mean that you are not going to be considered a "success" by the normal measures of the economy.

But this does not mean that you are not a success in life. It just means that you are not a success in the normal measures of the economy.</ai>

And it may mean that you are a "success" - whatever that means - from from a point of view that is not measured by the normal measures of the economy.


## Income Inequality

Income inequality is an often mentioned topic in the news. A number of indices have been developed to measure it.

It might be nice if there were also a "quality of life" inequality index.


## Who are you?

The following sections try to describe aspects of people that I encounter that are not measured by the normal measures of the economy.



## The Bohemian Life

Perhaps I am dreaming, but I often think that there are middle aged people that leave, say, San Francisco and move to, say, eastern Oregon and that they establish lives outside the normal economy. They might have a farm, shop or a business or perhaps just a basic job. Perhaps what they do is the most important thing in their lives. Perhaps another interest writing, making music, art, acting is their important life thing.

But whatever their important thing is, that thing is not measurable in any way by the normal economy.

Marginal, bohemian, hippie, hipster, whatever you want to call it, there are people that live outside the normal economy.

Of course, from time-to-time some of these people become famous and then they are measured by the normal economy.

But I am thinking of the people that are not famous, that are not measured by the normal economy. And yet they may have a very high quality of life.


## Service Industry Workers

Another group of people I think about are the service workers here in San Francisco that I encounter: the care-givers, dining service workers, housekeeping workers, the bartenders. Few of these people have a good income, and their quality of life is not that great.
They are people who do tough jobs but nonetheless consistently show up for work and do their jobs well. one way or another these people are have created a balance of life that is not measured by the normal economy.


## The Professionals

Listening to Cynthia and Kyle talk about their work, made me think that there may be other groups of people whose meanings and pleasures in life are just as outside the normal economy even though for all outward appearances they are part of the normal economy.

* The career civil servant that goes to Burning Man
* The bartender that that is also an indie film maker
* The dining service work that pays for and helps 17 family members come to the US legally and get jobs


## Age

I am reminded of the very old ranger we met - the MIT grad who invented new rescue techniques. Also me working at Autodesk and being the old guy there (older than two of my Autodesk CEOs John Walker and Carol Bartz).

Being a high level "individual contributor" is frequently an old person's game. You become too difficult to replace so they have to create a place for you. Then you become better and better at being special until you become some kind of corporate "treasure".


## Normal people

"I go to work five days a week. After work there is exercise, dinner and TV or a book. On the weekends there is shopping on Saturday and church and sports on Sunday" - that is the life of a normal person.

Most people I meet have lives of such consistency. They are the salt of the earth. They are the meat and potatoes of the inequality indexes. They are the people that make the world go round.

Much as I like talking to people like these as individuals, I have difficulty coming up with interesting things to say about such people in general.

Aside:
Statements that are like "All French||American||Chines people are like..." are not statements I like.


## Vive la difference

I am not normal. I think I have felt this way this I was quite young, but being able to articulate it too a very long time.

The amusing thing is thing is that once you realize that you are not normal, the good thing to do is to adapt and play with it.


## Questions

* How conscious are you of your "regular" work and and you other "extra" aspects?
* Is such separation of work and life actually a thing?
* Can one be totally "corporate" and have another part of one's life that is totally "non-corporate"?
* Of course I can think of somebody who straight in their corporate life and the is a cross-dresser or whatever in non-corporate life, rate in their corporate life and then has a totally non-corporate life. But what might be more fun to think about is someone who is corporate through-and-through but nonetheless encompasses a life aspect that is not measurable by the normal economy. Perhaps Admiral Grace Hopper is an example.



