# Cubism 3dot0

In a previous article, I talked of the two types of representation in architecture: the Platonic and the Aristotelian. The Platonic is the perfect CAD model. The Aristotelian is the imperfect lidar POI scan.

Recently. I have been playing with a web app called Kaiber. It is an ap that generates videos.It's particularly good at creating frames where every frame displays something slightly different. Different not just in sense of an object moving is space, but different in the sense of a different object.

It's a cubist painting in motion. It's showing and object through multiple lenses.
It's displaying important vectors in a vector field.

So here is the thing

Plato sees things as perfect. He sees the perfect form of a chair. He sees the perfect form of a table. He sees the perfect form of a building.

Aristotle sees things as imperfect. He sees the actual chair. He sees the actual table. He sees the actual building.

But  what about the metaphysics of the chair? The Hermeneutics of the chair? The semiotics of the chair? The chair as a signifier? The chair as a signified? The chair as a sign?

Perhaps, these are aspects that cubism can help us with.

God is Plato. Jesus is Aristotle. Cubism is the Holy Spirit.

is it showing different things the same way? Or is it showing the same thing in different ways?

The thing that was or the thing that is or the thing that will be?

If we can somehow add a cubist metaphysics to the platonic and the aristotelian, we may be able to create a new way of thinking about architecture - and even life in general.

We now have a three body problem. We have a trinity of ways of thinking about the world.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three-body_problem

The beauty of the three body problem is that there are an infinite number of solutions to achieve equilibrium.

