# 2026-05-02 - Long Term Investor

## How do you define or gauge a long-term investor?


The long-term investor does not time buying or selling stocks

The long-term investor does not acquire a stock based on hype or any short-term outlook.

The long term investor does not dispose of a stock based on hype or any short-term outlook.


Long-term investor feels sure that the stocks they own are the stocks that will prevail given any significant turmoil in the market.

Stocks are acquired based on a detailed set of targets and metrics based on the long-term prospects of the company.

The stocks are disposed of based on other stocks being likely to provide better performance and/or under the unusual circumstance of there being a significant change in the narrative of the company.

The targets and metrics cover a broad range of circumstances. They include things such as:

* The company's financial health and stability
* The company's competitive position in its industry
* The company's management and leadership
* The company's growth potential and innovation
* The company's social and environmental impact

Targets and metrics are mostly based on Beta Coefficients (Regression): These are estimates from a regression analysis where data is standardized so that variances of dependent/independent variables are 1. They reflect how many standard deviations a dependent variable changes per standard deviation increase in the predictor. This is to facilitate the comparison of stocks in many different sectors and capitalizations.

An allowable spectrum of betas will be agreed by the investors.

## Too much Information

The number of stocks in a holding is likely to be between a dozen and three dozen. This facilitates every person in the organization being reasonably familiar with all the stocks in the holdings.

No single or small number of stocks are held in such numbers as to outweigh the importance of all the others. The different percentages of the holdings are also part of an agreed metric and target.

The number of targets and metrics is likely to be around 30 or so. To assist with gauging the viability of an individual stock, targets and metrics for the entire list of the S&P 500 will be maintained.

## Sharing information

In order to communicate with other similarly minded investors, The investor maintains a spreadsheet of the stocks in the holding along with a percentage of the holding.

For the fun of it, the investor may create and share an imaginary portfolio, say, with a starting sum of $1,000,000 that contains the initial stocks in the holding, along with the percentage of the holding.

The spreadsheet also contains columns for the rationale for acquiring the stock, the rationale for disposing of the stock, and the targets and metrics for each stock. The spreadsheet is updated on a regular basis, and is shared partially or completely with with other investors.




