# 2024-04-12-raising-children.md

My family both paternal and maternal have been rich for generations. You might think that we were raised in very elegant ways. That was not the case. Or as I can see my parents and even my grandparents were mostly raised by servants. In other words I was raised by humble working class people and so were my parents and perhaps even my grandparents.

This means that we never went to museums, never went to the opera never even went to many games such as baseball or football. Because these are not things worth glass people do we did spend a lot of time drinking alcohol, worrying about food, worrying about clothes and dress, and many things that working class people worry about.

Whatever. I did not want to raise my children the way I was raised.

But how to raise the children.? Growing up very rich and even now being a 1PERCENTER I cannot pretend to be a humble person for working class person a salary man or anything like that I cannot I could not let those kinds of thoughts permeate the way I raised our children

Much as I envy the hunger and the energy and the drive that comes from a humble background, there was no way given the prosperity, luxury and plenty that I had and that I raised my children in that I could in anyway instill that hunger or energy in my children by external circumstances. All the external shirts and stents is that actual raised in were luxury plenty and overabundance. He was always visible to them and in the friends that they had and the schools that they went to and the houses that they lived in and the cars that they drove.

So what I wanted to do was to try and raise children that lived in very real experiences and somehow did not become "entitled brats".

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spoiled_child

I don't wanna go in too much detail about this, though maybe I will later date. What I'm really trying to do is help other people to delete some aspects of the way they wait they raise their children

I think the main thing is if you are an up and coming person made a lot of money but came from a humble background the last thing you want to do is try and recreate that humble background your child. There's no way you can do that. See as I pointed out the luxury of their surroundings they can see that they are not from humble background. They don't need to be as hungry and engaged in this driven because they already wear you are when you have achieved those the goals. Their ambition must be different

My task as apparent was to help that child evolve their own ambition this meant looking at the child and identifying things that they like to do and then upon identifying a thing aiding and abetting that thing but it was going to camp or buying materials or talking or finding friends or school or whatever it's just piling on any aspect of what a perceived ambition was until they decided yes or no. My favorite in this was Eloise. she had ambitions everywhere and every year new ambitions.

So I don't think give me a chance small allowance and restricting their money and making them try to be humble when they going to school with rich people is a good thing. They should have access to the same amount of money and goods and services as anybody else in their class.

At the same time I don't think they should have too much money they should not just be able to buy the best clothes and cars and whatever just because you have money.

Of course they can't have money if it's for a new job or to help somebody else start a business or to be part of some kind of larger organization.

Sorry for member of a scout group and we need a canoe to go somewhere, then we can come up with the money to get a canoe we can do this because it's we all want to do not just me ohh I could see that becoming tricky as well but in general using money to help a collective adventure is probably OK as opposed to buying just a sports car for one person.

I have three daughters that I think are quite special. How Isabel and I did this is beyond comprehension in many ways. On the other hand, there are many aspects that were intentional. We're not in any way wonderful make rich people or smart people or leaders or anything at any extreme but at the same time we wanted our children to be somebody. And I think we've done a good job

And this thought has just come to me: what is a somebody? I think a somebody is a person who is engaged in the world and is trying to make it a better place.

Dang, AI finished that last sentence and it did a nice job of it.


tags #ideas #parenting #raising-children #spoiled-child #somebody #ambition #entitled-brats #humble-background #luxury #plenty #overabundance #drive #energy #hunger #prosperity #1PERCENTER #scout-group #canoe #collective-adventure #money #allowance #entitled-brats #ambition #somebody #engaged-in-the-world #make-it-a-better-place

The tags were generated by AI.

This whole page was generated using voice recognition in VS code generated by Windows 11. It's doing a pretty good job, and I'm running a lot more this evening than I usually write just because of it. I should do this more often.




